
The First Book of Moses, called Genesis

   {1:1} In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. {1:2}
And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness [was] upon the
face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the
waters.

   {1:3} And God said, Let there be light: and there was light. {1:4}
And God saw the light, that [it was] good: and God divided the light
from the darkness. {1:5} And God called the light Day, and the darkness
he called Night. And the evening and the morning were the first day.

   {1:6} And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the
waters, and let it divide the waters from the waters. {1:7} And God
made the firmament, and divided the waters which [were] under the
firmament from the waters which [were] above the firmament: and it was
so. {1:8} And God called the firmament Heaven. And the evening and the
morning were the second day.

   {1:9} And God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered
together unto one place, and let the dry [land] appear: and it was so.
{1:10} And God called the dry [land] Earth; and the gathering together
of the waters called he Seas: and God saw that [it was] good. {1:11}
And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed,
[and] the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed [is] in
itself, upon the earth: and it was so. {1:12} And the earth brought
forth grass, [and] herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree
yielding fruit, whose seed [was] in itself, after his kind: and God saw
that [it was] good. {1:13} And the evening and the morning were the
third day.

   {1:14} And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the
heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be for signs, and
for seasons, and for days, and years: {1:15} And let them be for lights
in the firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth: and it was
so. {1:16} And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the
day, and the lesser light to rule the night: [he made] the stars also.
{1:17} And God set them in the firmament of the heaven to give light
upon the earth, {1:18} And to rule over the day and over the night, and
to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw that [it was] good.
{1:19} And the evening and the morning were the fourth day. {1:20} And
God said, Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature
that hath life, and fowl [that] may fly above the earth in the open
firmament of heaven. {1:21} And God created great whales, and every
living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth abundantly,
after their kind, and every winged fowl after his kind: and God saw
that [it was] good. {1:22} And God blessed them, saying, Be fruitful,
and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas, and let fowl multiply in
the earth. {1:23} And the evening and the morning were the fifth day.

   {1:24} And God said, Let the earth bring forth the living creature
after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing, and beast of the earth
after his kind: and it was so. {1:25} And God made the beast of the
earth after his kind, and cattle after their kind, and every thing that
creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that [it was] good.

   {1:26} And God said, Let us make man in our image, after our
likeness: and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over
the fowl of the air, and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and
over every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth. {1:27} So God
created man in his [own] image, in the image of God created he him;
male and female created he them. {1:28} And God blessed them, and God
said unto them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and
subdue it: and have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the
fowl of the air, and over every living thing that moveth upon the earth.

   {1:29} And God said, Behold, I have given you every herb bearing
seed, which [is] upon the face of all the earth, and every tree, in the
which [is] the fruit of a tree yielding seed; to you it shall be for
meat. {1:30} And to every beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the
air, and to every thing that creepeth upon the earth, wherein [there
is] life, [I have given] every green herb for meat: and it was so.
{1:31} And God saw every thing that he had made, and, behold, [it was]
very good. And the evening and the morning were the sixth day.

   {2:1} Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host
of them. {2:2} And on the seventh day God ended his work which he had
made; and he rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had
made. {2:3} And God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified it: because
that in it he had rested from all his work which God created and made.

   {2:4} These [are] the generations of the heavens and of the earth
when they were created, in the day that the LORD God made the earth and
the heavens, {2:5} And every plant of the field before it was in the
earth, and every herb of the field before it grew: for the LORD God had
not caused it to rain upon the earth, and [there was] not a man to till
the ground. {2:6} But there went up a mist from the earth, and watered
the whole face of the ground. {2:7} And the LORD God formed man [of]
the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the breath of
life; and man became a living soul.

   {2:8} And the LORD God planted a garden eastward in Eden; and there
he put the man whom he had formed. {2:9} And out of the ground made the
LORD God to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight, and good for
food; the tree of life also in the midst of the garden, and the tree of
knowledge of good and evil. {2:10} And a river went out of Eden to
water the garden; and from thence it was parted, and became into four
heads. {2:11} The name of the first [is] Pison: that [is] it which
compasseth the whole land of Havilah, where [there is] gold; {2:12} And
the gold of that land [is] good: there [is] bdellium and the onyx
stone. {2:13} And the name of the second river [is] Gihon: the same
[is] it that compasseth the whole land of Ethiopia. {2:14} And the name
of the third river [is] Hiddekel: that [is] it which goeth toward the
east of Assyria. And the fourth river [is] Euphrates. {2:15} And the
LORD God took the man, and put him into the garden of Eden to dress it
and to keep it. {2:16} And the LORD God commanded the man, saying, Of
every tree of the garden thou mayest freely eat: {2:17} But of the tree
of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shalt not eat of it: for in the
day that thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.

   {2:18} And the LORD God said, [It is] not good that the man should
be alone; I will make him an help meet for him. {2:19} And out of the
ground the LORD God formed every beast of the field, and every fowl of
the air; and brought [them] unto Adam to see what he would call them:
and whatsoever Adam called every living creature, that [was] the name
thereof. {2:20} And Adam gave names to all cattle, and to the fowl of
the air, and to every beast of the field; but for Adam there was not
found an help meet for him. {2:21} And the LORD God caused a deep sleep
to fall upon Adam and he slept: and he took one of his ribs, and closed
up the flesh instead thereof; {2:22} And the rib, which the LORD God
had taken from man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man.
{2:23} And Adam said, This [is] now bone of my bones, and flesh of my
flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man.
{2:24} Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife: and they shall be one flesh. {2:25} And they were
both naked, the man and his wife, and were not ashamed.

   {3:1} Now the serpent was more subtil than any beast of the field
which the LORD God had made. And he said unto the woman, Yea, hath God
said, Ye shall not eat of every tree of the garden?

   {3:2} And the woman said unto the serpent, We may eat of the fruit
of the trees of the garden: {3:3} But of the fruit of the tree which
[is] in the midst of the garden, God hath said, Ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die. {3:4} And the serpent said unto
the woman, Ye shall not surely die: {3:5} For God doth know that in the
day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be as
gods, knowing good and evil. {3:6} And when the woman saw that the tree
[was] good for food, and that it [was] pleasant to the eyes, and a tree
to be desired to make [one] wise, she took of the fruit thereof, and
did eat, and gave also unto her husband with her; and he did eat. {3:7}
And the eyes of them both were opened, and they knew that they [were]
naked; and they sewed fig leaves together, and made themselves aprons.
{3:8} And they heard the voice of the LORD God walking in the garden in
the cool of the day: and Adam and his wife hid themselves from the
presence of the LORD God amongst the trees of the garden. {3:9} And the
LORD God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where [art] thou? {3:10}
And he said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because
I [was] naked; and I hid myself. {3:11} And he said, Who told thee that
thou [wast] naked? Hast thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded
thee that thou shouldest not eat? {3:12} And the man said, The woman
whom thou gavest [to be] with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat. {3:13} And the LORD God said unto the woman, What [is] this [that]
thou hast done? And the woman said, The serpent beguiled me, and I did
eat. {3:14} And the LORD God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast
done this, thou [art] cursed above all cattle, and above every beast of
the field; upon thy belly shalt thou go, and dust shalt thou eat all
the days of thy life: {3:15} And I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and
thou shalt bruise his heel. {3:16} Unto the woman he said, I will
greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt
bring forth children; and thy desire [shall be] to thy husband, and he
shall rule over thee. {3:17} And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast
hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, and hast eaten of the tree, of
which I commanded thee, saying, Thou shalt not eat of it: cursed [is]
the ground for thy sake; in sorrow shalt thou eat [of] it all the days
of thy life; {3:18} Thorns also and thistles shall it bring forth to
thee; and thou shalt eat the herb of the field; {3:19} In the sweat of
thy face shalt thou eat bread, till thou return unto the ground; for
out of it wast thou taken: for dust thou [art,] and unto dust shalt
thou return. {3:20} And Adam called his wife's name Eve; because she
was the mother of all living. {3:21} Unto Adam also and to his wife did
the LORD God make coats of skins, and clothed them. {3:22} And the LORD
God said, Behold, the man is become as one of us, to know good and
evil: and now, lest he put forth his hand, and take also of the tree of
life, and eat, and live for ever: {3:23} Therefore the LORD God sent
him forth from the garden of Eden, to till the ground from whence he
was taken. {3:24} So he drove out the man; and he placed at the east of
the garden of Eden Cherubim, and a flaming sword which turned every
way, to keep the way of the tree of life.

   {4:1} And Adam knew Eve his wife; and she conceived, and bare Cain,
and said, I have gotten a man from the LORD. {4:2} And she again bare
his brother Abel. And Abel was a keeper of sheep, but Cain was a tiller
of the ground. {4:3} And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain
brought of the fruit of the ground an offering unto the LORD. {4:4} And
Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock and of the fat
thereof. And the LORD had respect unto Abel and to his offering: {4:5}
But unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. And Cain was very
wroth, and his countenance fell. {4:6} And the LORD said unto Cain, Why
art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance fallen? {4:7} If thou doest
well, shalt thou not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth
at the door. And unto thee [shall be] his desire, and thou shalt rule
over him. {4:8} And Cain talked with Abel his brother: and it came to
pass, when they were in the field, that Cain rose up against Abel his
brother, and slew him.

   {4:9} And the LORD said unto Cain, Where [is] Abel thy brother? And
he said, I know not: [Am] I my brother's keeper? {4:10} And he said,
What hast thou done? the voice of thy brother's blood crieth unto me
from the ground. {4:11} And now [art] thou cursed from the earth, which
hath opened her mouth to receive thy brother's blood from thy hand;
{4:12} When thou tillest the ground, it shall not henceforth yield unto
thee her strength; a fugitive and a vagabond shalt thou be in the
earth. {4:13} And Cain said unto the LORD, My punishment [is] greater
than I can bear. {4:14} Behold, thou hast driven me out this day from
the face of the earth; and from thy face shall I be hid; and I shall be
a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth; and it shall come to pass,
[that] every one that findeth me shall slay me. {4:15} And the LORD
said unto him, Therefore whosoever slayeth Cain, vengeance shall be
taken on him sevenfold. And the LORD set a mark upon Cain, lest any
finding him should kill him.

   {4:16} And Cain went out from the presence of the LORD, and dwelt in
the land of Nod, on the east of Eden. {4:17} And Cain knew his wife;
and she conceived, and bare Enoch: and he builded a city, and called
the name of the city, after the name of his son, Enoch. {4:18} And unto
Enoch was born Irad: and Irad begat Mehujael: and Mehujael begat
Methusael: and Methusael begat Lamech.

   {4:19} And Lamech took unto him two wives: the name of the one [was]
Adah, and the name of the other Zillah. {4:20} And Adah bare Jabal: he
was the father of such as dwell in tents, and [of such as have] cattle.
{4:21} And his brother's name [was] Jubal: he was the father of all
such as handle the harp and organ. {4:22} And Zillah, she also bare
Tubal- cain, an instructer of every artificer in brass and iron: and
the sister of Tubal-cain [was] Naamah. {4:23} And Lamech said unto his
wives, Adah and Zillah, Hear my voice; ye wives of Lamech, hearken unto
my speech: for I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my
hurt. {4:24} If Cain shall be avenged sevenfold, truly Lamech seventy
and sevenfold.

   {4:25} And Adam knew his wife again; and she bare a son, and called
his name Seth: For God, [said she,] hath appointed me another seed
instead of Abel, whom Cain slew. {4:26} And to Seth, to him also there
was born a son; and he called his name Enos: then began men to call
upon the name of the LORD.

   {5:1} This [is] the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that
God created man, in the likeness of God made he him; {5:2} Male and
female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam,
in the day when they were created.

   {5:3} And Adam lived an hundred and thirty years, and begat [a son]
in his own likeness, after his image; and called his name Seth: {5:4}
And the days of Adam after he had begotten Seth were eight hundred
years: and he begat sons and daughters: {5:5} And all the days that
Adam lived were nine hundred and thirty years: and he died. {5:6} And
Seth lived an hundred and five years, and begat Enos: {5:7} And Seth
lived after he begat Enos eight hundred and seven years, and begat sons
and daughters: {5:8} And all the days of Seth were nine hundred and
twelve years: and he died.

   {5:9} And Enos lived ninety years, and begat Cainan: {5:10} And Enos
lived after he begat Cainan eight hundred and fifteen years, and begat
sons and daughters: {5:11} And all the days of Enos were nine hundred
and five years: and he died.

   {5:12} And Cainan lived seventy years, and begat Mahalaleel: {5:13}
And Cainan lived after he begat Mahalaleel eight hundred and forty
years, and begat sons and daughters: {5:14} And all the days of Cainan
were nine hundred and ten years: and he died.

   {5:15} And Mahalaleel lived sixty and five years, and begat Jared:
{5:16} And Mahalaleel lived after he begat Jared eight hundred and
thirty years, and begat sons and daughters: {5:17} And all the days of
Mahalaleel were eight hundred ninety and five years: and he died.

   {5:18} And Jared lived an hundred sixty and two years, and he begat
Enoch: {5:19} And Jared lived after he begat Enoch eight hundred years,
and begat sons and daughters: {5:20} And all the days of Jared were
nine hundred sixty and two years: and he died.

   {5:21} And Enoch lived sixty and five years, and begat Methuselah:
{5:22} And Enoch walked with God after he begat Methuselah three
hundred years, and begat sons and daughters: {5:23} And all the days of
Enoch were three hundred sixty and five years: {5:24} And Enoch walked
with God: and he [was] not; for God took him. {5:25} And Methuselah
lived an hundred eighty and seven years, and begat Lamech: {5:26} And
Methuselah lived after he begat Lamech seven hundred eighty and two
years, and begat sons and daughters: {5:27} And all the days of
Methuselah were nine hundred sixty and nine years: and he died.

   {5:28} And Lamech lived an hundred eighty and two years, and begat a
son: {5:29} And he called his name Noah, saying, This [same] shall
comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the
ground which the LORD hath cursed. {5:30} And Lamech lived after he
begat Noah five hundred ninety and five years, and begat sons and
daughters: {5:31} And all the days of Lamech were seven hundred seventy
and seven years: and he died. {5:32} And Noah was five hundred years
old: and Noah begat Shem, Ham, and Japheth.

   {6:1} And it came to pass, when men began to multiply on the face of
the earth, and daughters were born unto them, {6:2} That the sons of
God saw the daughters of men that they [were] fair; and they took them
wives of all which they chose. {6:3} And the LORD said, My spirit shall
not always strive with man, for that he also [is] flesh: yet his days
shall be an hundred and twenty years. {6:4} There were giants in the
earth in those days; and also after that, when the sons of God came in
unto the daughters of men, and they bare [children] to them, the same
[became] mighty men which [were] of old, men of renown.

   {6:5} And GOD saw that the wickedness of man [was] great in the
earth, and [that] every imagination of the thoughts of his heart [was]
only evil continually. {6:6} And it repented the LORD that he had made
man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart. {6:7} And the LORD
said, I will destroy man whom I have created from the face of the
earth; both man, and beast, and the creeping thing, and the fowls of
the air; for it repenteth me that I have made them. {6:8} But Noah
found grace in the eyes of the LORD.

   {6:9} These [are] the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man [and]
perfect in his generations, [and] Noah walked with God. {6:10} And Noah
begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth. {6:11} The earth also was
corrupt before God, and the earth was filled with violence. {6:12} And
God looked upon the earth, and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh
had corrupted his way upon the earth. {6:13} And God said unto Noah,
The end of all flesh is come before me; for the earth is filled with
violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy them with the earth.

   {6:14} Make thee an ark of gopher wood; rooms shalt thou make in the
ark, and shalt pitch it within and without with pitch. {6:15} And this
[is the fashion] which thou shalt make it [of:] The length of the ark
[shall be] three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits, and
the height of it thirty cubits. {6:16} A window shalt thou make to the
ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it above; and the door of the ark
shalt thou set in the side thereof; [with] lower, second, and third
[stories] shalt thou make it. {6:17} And, behold, I, even I, do bring a
flood of waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein [is] the
breath of life, from under heaven; [and] every thing that [is] in the
earth shall die. {6:18} But with thee will I establish my covenant; and
thou shalt come into the ark, thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy
sons' wives with thee. {6:19} And of every living thing of all flesh,
two of every [sort] shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep [them] alive
with thee; they shall be male and female. {6:20} Of fowls after their
kind, and of cattle after their kind, of every creeping thing of the
earth after his kind, two of every [sort] shall come unto thee, to keep
[them] alive. {6:21} And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten,
and thou shalt gather [it] to thee; and it shall be for food for thee,
and for them. {6:22} Thus did Noah; according to all that God commanded
him, so did he.

   {7:1} And the LORD said unto Noah, Come thou and all thy house into
the ark; for thee have I seen righteous before me in this generation.
{7:2} Of every clean beast thou shalt take to thee by sevens, the male
and his female: and of beasts that [are] not clean by two, the male and
his female. {7:3} Of fowls also of the air by sevens, the male and the
female; to keep seed alive upon the face of all the earth. {7:4} For
yet seven days, and I will cause it to rain upon the earth forty days
and forty nights; and every living substance that I have made will I
destroy from off the face of the earth. {7:5} And Noah did according
unto all that the LORD commanded him. {7:6} And Noah [was] six hundred
years old when the flood of waters was upon the earth.

   {7:7} And Noah went in, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons'
wives with him, into the ark, because of the waters of the flood. {7:8}
Of clean beasts, and of beasts that [are] not clean, and of fowls, and
of every thing that creepeth upon the earth, {7:9} There went in two
and two unto Noah into the ark, the male and the female, as God had
commanded Noah. {7:10} And it came to pass after seven days, that the
waters of the flood were upon the earth.

   {7:11} In the six hundredth year of Noah's life, in the second
month, the seventeenth day of the month, the same day were all the
fountains of the great deep broken up, and the windows of heaven were
opened. {7:12} And the rain was upon the earth forty days and forty
nights. {7:13} In the selfsame day entered Noah, and Shem, and Ham, and
Japheth, the sons of Noah, and Noah's wife, and the three wives of his
sons with them, into the ark; {7:14} They, and every beast after his
kind, and all the cattle after their kind, and every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth after his kind, and every fowl after his
kind, every bird of every sort. {7:15} And they went in unto Noah into
the ark, two and two of all flesh, wherein [is] the breath of life.
{7:16} And they that went in, went in male and female of all flesh, as
God had commanded him: and the LORD shut him in. {7:17} And the flood
was forty days upon the earth; and the waters increased, and bare up
the ark, and it was lift up above the earth. {7:18} And the waters
prevailed, and were increased greatly upon the earth; and the ark went
upon the face of the waters. {7:19} And the waters prevailed
exceedingly upon the earth; and all the high hills, that [were] under
the whole heaven, were covered. {7:20} Fifteen cubits upward did the
waters prevail; and the mountains were covered. {7:21} And all flesh
died that moved upon the earth, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of
beast, and of every creeping thing that creepeth upon the earth, and
every man: {7:22} All in whose nostrils [was] the breath of life, of
all that [was] in the dry [land,] died. {7:23} And every living
substance was destroyed which was upon the face of the ground, both
man, and cattle, and the creeping things, and the fowl of the heaven;
and they were destroyed from the earth: and Noah only remained [alive,]
and they that [were] with him in the ark. {7:24} And the waters
prevailed upon the earth an hundred and fifty days.

   {8:1} And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the
cattle that [was] with him in the ark: and God made a wind to pass over
the earth, and the waters asswaged; {8:2} The fountains also of the
deep and the windows of heaven were stopped, and the rain from heaven
was restrained; {8:3} And the waters returned from off the earth
continually: and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the waters
were abated. {8:4} And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the
seventeenth day of the month, upon the mountains of Ararat. {8:5} And
the waters decreased continually until the tenth month: in the tenth
[month,] on the first [day] of the month, were the tops of the
mountains seen.

   {8:6} And it came to pass at the end of forty days, that Noah opened
the window of the ark which he had made: {8:7} And he sent forth a
raven, which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from
off the earth. {8:8} Also he sent forth a dove from him, to see if the
waters were abated from off the face of the ground; {8:9} But the dove
found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him into
the ark, for the waters [were] on the face of the whole earth: then he
put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in unto him into the
ark. {8:10} And he stayed yet other seven days; and again he sent forth
the dove out of the ark; {8:11} And the dove came in to him in the
evening; and, lo, in her mouth [was] an olive leaf pluckt off: so Noah
knew that the waters were abated from off the earth. {8:12} And he
stayed yet other seven days; and sent forth the dove; which returned
not again unto him any more.

   {8:13} And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first year, in
the first [month,] the first [day] of the month, the waters were dried
up from off the earth: and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and
looked, and, behold, the face of the ground was dry. {8:14} And in the
second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the
earth dried.

   {8:15} And God spake unto Noah, saying, {8:16} Go forth of the ark,
thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives with thee. {8:17}
Bring forth with thee every living thing that [is] with thee, of all
flesh, [both] of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that
creepeth upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the earth,
and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth. {8:18} And Noah went
forth, and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him: {8:19}
Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, [and] whatsoever
creepeth upon the earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.

   {8:20} And Noah builded an altar unto the LORD; and took of every
clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on
the altar. {8:21} And the LORD smelled a sweet savour; and the LORD
said in his heart, I will not again curse the ground any more for man's
sake; for the imagination of man's heart [is] evil from his youth;
neither will I again smite any more every thing living, as I have done.
{8:22} While the earth remaineth, seedtime and harvest, and cold and
heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease.

   {9:1} And God blessed Noah and his sons, and said unto them, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. {9:2} And the fear of
you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth, and
upon every fowl of the air, upon all that moveth [upon] the earth, and
upon all the fishes of the sea; into your hand are they delivered.
{9:3} Every moving thing that liveth shall be meat for you; even as the
green herb have I given you all things. {9:4} But flesh with the life
thereof, [which is] the blood thereof, shall ye not eat. {9:5} And
surely your blood of your lives will I require; at the hand of every
beast will I require it, and at the hand of man; at the hand of every
man's brother will I require the life of man. {9:6} Whoso sheddeth
man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed: for in the image of God
made he man. {9:7} And you, be ye fruitful, and multiply; bring forth
abundantly in the earth, and multiply therein.

   {9:8} And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him, saying,
{9:9} And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your
seed after you; {9:10} And with every living creature that [is] with
you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with
you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth.
{9:11} And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all
flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there
any more be a flood to destroy the earth. {9:12} And God said, This
[is] the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and
every living creature that [is] with you, for perpetual generations:
{9:13} I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a
covenant between me and the earth. {9:14} And it shall come to pass,
when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the
cloud: {9:15} And I will remember my covenant, which [is] between me
and you and every living creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no
more become a flood to destroy all flesh. {9:16} And the bow shall be
in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may remember the
everlasting covenant between God and every living creature of all flesh
that [is] upon the earth. {9:17} And God said unto Noah, This [is] the
token of the covenant, which I have established between me and all
flesh that [is] upon the earth.

   {9:18} And the sons of Noah, that went forth of the ark, were Shem,
and Ham, and Japheth: and Ham is the father of Canaan. {9:19} These
[are] the three sons of Noah: and of them was the whole earth
overspread. {9:20} And Noah began [to be] an husbandman, and he planted
a vineyard: {9:21} And he drank of the wine, and was drunken; and he
was uncovered within his tent. {9:22} And Ham, the father of Canaan,
saw the nakedness of his father, and told his two brethren without.
{9:23} And Shem and Japheth took a garment, and laid [it] upon both
their shoulders, and went backward, and covered the nakedness of their
father; and their faces [were] backward, and they saw not their
father's nakedness. {9:24} And Noah awoke from his wine, and knew what
his younger son had done unto him. {9:25} And he said, Cursed [be]
Canaan; a servant of servants shall he be unto his brethren. {9:26} And
he said, Blessed [be] the LORD God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his
servant. {9:27} God shall enlarge Japheth, and he shall dwell in the
tents of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant.

   {9:28} And Noah lived after the flood three hundred and fifty years.
{9:29} And all the days of Noah were nine hundred and fifty years: and
he died.

   {10:1} Now these [are] the generations of the sons of Noah, Shem,
Ham, and Japheth: and unto them were sons born after the flood. {10:2}
The sons of Japheth; Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal,
and Meshech, and Tiras. {10:3} And the sons of Gomer; Ashkenaz, and
Riphath, and Togarmah. {10:4} And the sons of Javan; Elishah, and
Tarshish, Kittim, and Dodanim. {10:5} By these were the isles of the
Gentiles divided in their lands; every one after his tongue, after
their families, in their nations.

   {10:6} And the sons of Ham; Cush, and Mizraim, and Phut, and Canaan.
{10:7} And the sons of Cush; Seba, and Havilah, and Sabtah, and Raamah,
and Sabtechah: and the sons of Raamah; Sheba, and Dedan. {10:8} And
Cush begat Nimrod: he began to be a mighty one in the earth. {10:9} He
was a mighty hunter before the LORD: wherefore it is said, Even as
Nimrod the mighty hunter before the LORD. {10:10} And the beginning of
his kingdom was Babel, and Erech, and Accad, and Calneh, in the land of
Shinar. {10:11} Out of that land went forth Asshur, and builded
Nineveh, and the city Rehoboth, and Calah, {10:12} And Resen between
Nineveh and Calah: the same [is] a great city. {10:13} And Mizraim
begat Ludim, and Anamim, and Lehabim, and Naphtuhim, {10:14} And
Pathrusim, and Casluhim, (out of whom came Philistim,) and Caphtorim.

   {10:15} And Canaan begat Sidon his firstborn, and Heth, {10:16} And
the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgasite, {10:17} And the
Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite, {10:18} And the Arvadite, and
the Zemarite, and the Hamathite: and afterward were the families of the
Canaanites spread abroad. {10:19} And the border of the Canaanites was
from Sidon, as thou comest to Gerar, unto Gaza; as thou goest, unto
Sodom, and Gomorrah, and Admah, and Zeboim, even unto Lasha. {10:20}
These [are] the sons of Ham, after their families, after their tongues,
in their countries, [and] in their nations.

   {10:21} Unto Shem also, the father of all the children of Eber, the
brother of Japheth the elder, even to him were [children] born. {10:22}
The children of Shem; Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and
Aram. {10:23} And the children of Aram; Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and
Mash. {10:24} And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber. {10:25}
And unto Eber were born two sons: the name of one [was] Peleg; for in
his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name [was] Joktan.
{10:26} And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazar-maveth, and
Jerah, {10:27} And Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, {10:28} And Obal, and
Abimael, and Sheba, {10:29} And Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all
these [were] the sons of Joktan. {10:30} And their dwelling was from
Mesha, as thou goest unto Sephar a mount of the east. {10:31} These
[are] the sons of Shem, after their families, after their tongues, in
their lands, after their nations. {10:32} These [are] the families of
the sons of Noah, after their generations, in their nations: and by
these were the nations divided in the earth after the flood.

   {11:1} And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.
{11:2} And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that they
found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt there. {11:3} And
they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick, and burn them
throughly. And they had brick for stone, and slime had they for morter.
{11:4} And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower, whose
top [may reach] unto heaven; and let us make us a name, lest we be
scattered abroad upon the face of the whole earth. {11:5} And the LORD
came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of men
builded. {11:6} And the LORD said, Behold, the people [is] one, and
they have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now nothing
will be restrained from them, which they have imagined to do. {11:7} Go
to, let us go down, and there confound their language, that they may
not understand one another's speech. {11:8} So the LORD scattered them
abroad from thence upon the face of all the earth: and they left off to
build the city. {11:9} Therefore is the name of it called Babel;
because the LORD did there confound the language of all the earth: and
from thence did the LORD scatter them abroad upon the face of all the
earth.

   {11:10} These [are] the generations of Shem: Shem [was] an hundred
years old, and begat Arphaxad two years after the flood: {11:11} And
Shem lived after he begat Arphaxad five hundred years, and begat sons
and daughters. {11:12} And Arphaxad lived five and thirty years, and
begat Salah: {11:13} And Arphaxad lived after he begat Salah four
hundred and three years, and begat sons and daughters. {11:14} And
Salah lived thirty years, and begat Eber: {11:15} And Salah lived after
he begat Eber four hundred and three years, and begat sons and
daughters. {11:16} And Eber lived four and thirty years, and begat
Peleg: {11:17} And Eber lived after he begat Peleg four hundred and
thirty years, and begat sons and daughters. {11:18} And Peleg lived
thirty years, and begat Reu: {11:19} And Peleg lived after he begat Reu
two hundred and nine years, and begat sons and daughters. {11:20} And
Reu lived two and thirty years, and begat Serug: {11:21} And Reu lived
after he begat Serug two hundred and seven years, and begat sons and
daughters. {11:22} And Serug lived thirty years, and begat Nahor:
{11:23} And Serug lived after he begat Nahor two hundred years, and
begat sons and daughters. {11:24} And Nahor lived nine and twenty
years, and begat Terah: {11:25} And Nahor lived after he begat Terah an
hundred and nineteen years, and begat sons and daughters. {11:26} And
Terah lived seventy years, and begat Abram, Nahor, and Haran.

   {11:27} Now these [are] the generations of Terah: Terah begat Abram,
Nahor, and Haran; and Haran begat Lot. {11:28} And Haran died before
his father Terah in the land of his nativity, in Ur of the Chaldees.
{11:29} And Abram and Nahor took them wives: the name of Abram's wife
[was] Sarai; and the name of Nahor's wife, Milcah, the daughter of
Haran, the father of Milcah, and the father of Iscah. {11:30} But Sarai
was barren; she [had] no child. {11:31} And Terah took Abram his son,
and Lot the son of Haran his son's son, and Sarai his daughter in law,
his son Abram's wife; and they went forth with them from Ur of the
Chaldees, to go into the land of Canaan; and they came unto Haran, and
dwelt there. {11:32} And the days of Terah were two hundred and five
years: and Terah died in Haran.

   {12:1} Now the LORD had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy
country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, unto a land
that I will shew thee: {12:2} And I will make of thee a great nation,
and I will bless thee, and make thy name great; and thou shalt be a
blessing: {12:3} And I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him
that curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth be
blessed. {12:4} So Abram departed, as the LORD had spoken unto him; and
Lot went with him: and Abram [was] seventy and five years old when he
departed out of Haran. {12:5} And Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot
his brother's son, and all their substance that they had gathered, and
the souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth to go into
the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they came.

   {12:6} And Abram passed through the land unto the place of Sichem,
unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite [was] then in the land.
{12:7} And the LORD appeared unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I
give this land: and there builded he an altar unto the LORD, who
appeared unto him. {12:8} And he removed from thence unto a mountain on
the east of Bethel, and pitched his tent, [having] Bethel on the west,
and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar unto the LORD, and
called upon the name of the LORD. {12:9} And Abram journeyed, going on
still toward the south.

   {12:10} And there was a famine in the land: and Abram went down into
Egypt to sojourn there; for the famine [was] grievous in the land.
{12:11} And it came to pass, when he was come near to enter into Egypt,
that he said unto Sarai his wife, Behold now, I know that thou [art] a
fair woman to look upon: {12:12} Therefore it shall come to pass, when
the Egyptians shall see thee, that they shall say, This [is] his wife:
and they will kill me, but they will save thee alive. {12:13} Say, I
pray thee, thou [art] my sister: that it may be well with me for thy
sake; and my soul shall live because of thee.

   {12:14} And it came to pass, that, when Abram was come into Egypt,
the Egyptians beheld the woman that she [was] very fair. {12:15} The
princes also of Pharaoh saw her, and commended her before Pharaoh: and
the woman was taken into Pharaoh's house. {12:16} And he entreated
Abram well for her sake: and he had sheep, and oxen, and he asses, and
menservants, and maidservants, and she asses, and camels. {12:17} And
the LORD plagued Pharaoh and his house with great plagues because of
Sarai Abram's wife. {12:18} And Pharaoh called Abram, and said, What
[is] this [that] thou hast done unto me? why didst thou not tell me
that she [was] thy wife? {12:19} Why saidst thou, She [is] my sister?
so I might have taken her to me to wife: now therefore behold thy wife,
take [her,] and go thy way. {12:20} And Pharaoh commanded [his] men
concerning him: and they sent him away, and his wife, and all that he
had.

   {13:1} And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and all
that he had, and Lot with him, into the south. {13:2} And Abram [was]
very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold. {13:3} And he went on his
journeys from the south even to Bethel, unto the place where his tent
had been at the beginning, between Bethel and Hai; {13:4} Unto the
place of the altar, which he had made there at the first: and there
Abram called on the name of the LORD.

   {13:5} And Lot also, which went with Abram, had flocks, and herds,
and tents. {13:6} And the land was not able to bear them, that they
might dwell together: for their substance was great, so that they could
not dwell together. {13:7} And there was a strife between the herdmen
of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle: and the Canaanite
and the Perizzite dwelled then in the land. {13:8} And Abram said unto
Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and
between my herdmen and thy herdmen; for we [be] brethren. {13:9} [Is]
not the whole land before thee? separate thyself, I pray thee, from me:
if [thou wilt take] the left hand, then I will go to the right; or if
[thou depart] to the right hand, then I will go to the left. {13:10}
And Lot lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it
[was] well watered every where, before the LORD destroyed Sodom and
Gomorrah, [even] as the garden of the LORD, like the land of Egypt, as
thou comest unto Zoar. {13:11} Then Lot chose him all the plain of
Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and they separated themselves the one
from the other. {13:12} Abram dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot
dwelled in the cities of the plain, and pitched [his] tent toward
Sodom. {13:13} But the men of Sodom [were] wicked and sinners before
the LORD exceedingly.

   {13:14} And the LORD said unto Abram, after that Lot was separated
from him, Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou
art northward, and southward, and eastward, and westward: {13:15} For
all the land which thou seest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed
for ever. {13:16} And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth: so
that if a man can number the dust of the earth, [then] shall thy seed
also be numbered. {13:17} Arise, walk through the land in the length of
it and in the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee. {13:18} Then
Abram removed [his] tent, and came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre,
which [is] in Hebron, and built there an altar unto the LORD.

   {14:1} And it came to pass in the days of Amraphel king of Shinar,
Arioch king of Ellasar, Chedorlaomer king of Elam, and Tidal king of
nations; {14:2} [That these] made war with Bera king of Sodom, and with
Birsha king of Gomorrah, Shinab king of Admah, and Shemeber king of
Zeboiim, and the king of Bela, which is Zoar. {14:3} All these were
joined together in the vale of Siddim, which is the salt sea. {14:4}
Twelve years they served Chedorlaomer, and in the thirteenth year they
rebelled. {14:5} And in the fourteenth year came Chedorlaomer, and the
kings that [were] with him, and smote the Rephaims in Ashteroth
Karnaim, and the Zuzims in Ham, and the Emims in Shaveh Kiriathaim,
{14:6} And the Horites in their mount Seir, unto El-paran, which [is]
by the wilderness. {14:7} And they returned, and came to En-mishpat,
which [is] Kadesh, and smote all the country of the Amalekites, and
also the Amorites that dwelt in Hazezon- tamar. {14:8} And there went
out the king of Sodom, and the king of Gomorrah, and the king of Admah,
and the king of Zeboiim, and the king of Bela (the same [is] Zoar;) and
they joined battle with them in the vale of Siddim; {14:9} With
Chedorlaomer the king of Elam, and with Tidal king of nations, and
Amraphel king of Shinar, and Arioch king of Ellasar; four kings with
five. {14:10} And the vale of Siddim [was full of] slimepits; and the
kings of Sodom and Gomorrah fled, and fell there; and they that
remained fled to the mountain. {14:11} And they took all the goods of
Sodom and Gomorrah, and all their victuals, and went their way. {14:12}
And they took Lot, Abram's brother's son, who dwelt in Sodom, and his
goods, and departed.

   {14:13} And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the
Hebrew; for he dwelt in the plain of Mamre the Amorite, brother of
Eshcol, and brother of Aner: and these [were] confederate with Abram.
{14:14} And when Abram heard that his brother was taken captive, he
armed his trained [servants,] born in his own house, three hundred and
eighteen, and pursued [them] unto Dan. {14:15} And he divided himself
against them, he and his servants, by night, and smote them, and
pursued them unto Hobah, which [is] on the left hand of Damascus.
{14:16} And he brought back all the goods, and also brought again his
brother Lot, and his goods, and the women also, and the people.

   {14:17} And the king of Sodom went out to meet him after his return
from the slaughter of Chedorlaomer, and of the kings that [were] with
him, at the valley of Shaveh, which [is] the king's dale. {14:18} And
Melchizedek king of Salem brought forth bread and wine: and he [was]
the priest of the most high God. {14:19} And he blessed him, and said,
Blessed [be] Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth:
{14:20} And blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine
enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all. {14:21} And the
king of Sodom said unto Abram, Give me the persons, and take the goods
to thyself. {14:22} And Abram said to the king of Sodom, I have lift up
mine hand unto the LORD, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and
earth, {14:23} That I will not [take] from a thread even to a
shoelatchet, and that I will not take any thing that [is] thine, lest
thou shouldest say, I have made Abram rich: {14:24} Save only that
which the young men have eaten, and the portion of the men which went
with me, Aner, Eshcol, and Mamre; let them take their portion.

   {15:1} After these things the word of the LORD came unto Abram in a
vision, saying, Fear not, Abram: I [am] thy shield, [and] thy exceeding
great reward. {15:2} And Abram said, Lord GOD, what wilt thou give me,
seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this Eliezer of
Damascus? {15:3} And Abram said, Behold, to me thou hast given no seed:
and, lo, one born in my house is mine heir. {15:4} And, behold, the
word of the LORD [came] unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir;
but he that shall come forth out of thine own bowels shall be thine
heir. {15:5} And he brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now toward
heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number them: and he said
unto him, So shall thy seed be. {15:6} And he believed in the LORD; and
he counted it to him for righteousness. {15:7} And he said unto him, I
[am] the LORD that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee
this land to inherit it. {15:8} And he said, Lord GOD, whereby shall I
know that I shall inherit it? {15:9} And he said unto him, Take me an
heifer of three years old, and a she goat of three years old, and a ram
of three years old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon. {15:10} And
he took unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and laid
each piece one against another: but the birds divided he not. {15:11}
And when the fowls came down upon the carcases, Abram drove them away.
{15:12} And when the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram;
and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him. {15:13} And he said
unto Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger in a
land [that is] not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict
them four hundred years; {15:14} And also that nation, whom they shall
serve, will I judge: and afterward shall they come out with great
substance. {15:15} And thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou
shalt be buried in a good old age. {15:16} But in the fourth generation
they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the Amorites [is] not
yet full. {15:17} And it came to pass, that, when the sun went down,
and it was dark, behold a smoking furnace, and a burning lamp that
passed between those pieces. {15:18} In the same day the LORD made a
covenant with Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, from
the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river Euphrates: {15:19}
The Kenites, and the Kenizzites, and the Kadmonites, {15:20} And the
Hittites, and the Perizzites, and the Rephaims, {15:21} And the
Amorites, and the Canaanites, and the Girgashites, and the Jebusites.

   {16:1} Now Sarai Abram's wife bare him no children: and she had an
handmaid, an Egyptian, whose name [was] Hagar. {16:2} And Sarai said
unto Abram, Behold now, the LORD hath restrained me from bearing: I
pray thee, go in unto my maid; it may be that I may obtain children by
her. And Abram hearkened to the voice of Sarai. {16:3} And Sarai
Abram's wife took Hagar her maid the Egyptian, after Abram had dwelt
ten years in the land of Canaan, and gave her to her husband Abram to
be his wife.

   {16:4} And he went in unto Hagar, and she conceived: and when she
saw that she had conceived, her mistress was despised in her eyes.
{16:5} And Sarai said unto Abram, My wrong [be] upon thee: I have given
my maid into thy bosom; and when she saw that she had conceived, I was
despised in her eyes: the LORD judge between me and thee. {16:6} But
Abram said unto Sarai, Behold, thy maid [is] in thy hand; do to her as
it pleaseth thee. And when Sarai dealt hardly with her, she fled from
her face.

   {16:7} And the angel of the LORD found her by a fountain of water in
the wilderness, by the fountain in the way to Shur. {16:8} And he said,
Hagar, Sarai's maid, whence camest thou? and whither wilt thou go? And
she said, I flee from the face of my mistress Sarai. {16:9} And the
angel of the LORD said unto her, Return to thy mistress, and submit
thyself under her hands. {16:10} And the angel of the LORD said unto
her, I will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be
numbered for multitude. {16:11} And the angel of the LORD said unto
her, Behold, thou [art] with child, and shalt bear a son, and shalt
call his name Ishmael; because the LORD hath heard thy affliction.
{16:12} And he will be a wild man; his hand [will be] against every
man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the
presence of all his brethren. {16:13} And she called the name of the
LORD that spake unto her, Thou God seest me: for she said, Have I also
here looked after him that seeth me? {16:14} Wherefore the well was
called Beer-lahai-roi; behold, [it is] between Kadesh and Bered.

   {16:15} And Hagar bare Abram a son: and Abram called his son's name,
which Hagar bare, Ishmael. {16:16} And Abram [was] fourscore and six
years old, when Hagar bare Ishmael to Abram.

   {17:1} And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the LORD
appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I [am] the Almighty God; walk
before me, and be thou perfect. {17:2} And I will make my covenant
between me and thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly. {17:3} And
Abram fell on his face: and God talked with him, saying, {17:4} As for
me, behold, my covenant [is] with thee, and thou shalt be a father of
many nations. {17:5} Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram,
but thy name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have I made
thee. {17:6} And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I will make
nations of thee, and kings shall come out of thee. {17:7} And I will
establish my covenant between me and thee and thy seed after thee in
their generations for an everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee,
and to thy seed after thee. {17:8} And I will give unto thee, and to
thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land
of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God.

   {17:9} And God said unto Abraham, Thou shalt keep my covenant
therefore, thou, and thy seed after thee in their generations. {17:10}
This [is] my covenant, which ye shall keep, between me and you and thy
seed after thee; Every man child among you shall be circumcised.
{17:11} And ye shall circumcise the flesh of your foreskin; and it
shall be a token of the covenant betwixt me and you. {17:12} And he
that is eight days old shall be circumcised among you, every man child
in your generations, he that is born in the house, or bought with money
of any stranger, which [is] not of thy seed. {17:13} He that is born in
thy house, and he that is bought with thy money, must needs be
circumcised: and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an everlasting
covenant. {17:14} And the uncircumcised man child whose flesh of his
foreskin is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his
people; he hath broken my covenant.

   {17:15} And God said unto Abraham, As for Sarai thy wife, thou shalt
not call her name Sarai, but Sarah [shall] her name [be. ]{17:16} And I
will bless her, and give thee a son also of her: yea, I will bless her,
and she shall be [a mother] of nations; kings of people shall be of
her. {17:17} Then Abraham fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in
his heart, Shall [a child] be born unto him that is an hundred years
old? and shall Sarah, that is ninety years old, bear? {17:18} And
Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee! {17:19}
And God said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed; and thou
shalt call his name Isaac: and I will establish my covenant with him
for an everlasting covenant, [and] with his seed after him. {17:20} And
as for Ishmael, I have heard thee: Behold, I have blessed him, and will
make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; twelve princes
shall he beget, and I will make him a great nation. {17:21} But my
covenant will I establish with Isaac, which Sarah shall bear unto thee
at this set time in the next year. {17:22} And he left off talking with
him, and God went up from Abraham.

   {17:23} And Abraham took Ishmael his son, and all that were born in
his house, and all that were bought with his money, every male among
the men of Abraham's house; and circumcised the flesh of their foreskin
in the selfsame day, as God had said unto him. {17:24} And Abraham
[was] ninety years old and nine, when he was circumcised in the flesh
of his foreskin. {17:25} And Ishmael his son [was] thirteen years old,
when he was circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin. {17:26} In the
selfsame day was Abraham circumcised, and Ishmael his son. {17:27} And
all the men of his house, born in the house, and bought with money of
the stranger, were circumcised with him.

   {18:1} And the LORD appeared unto him in the plains of Mamre: and he
sat in the tent door in the heat of the day; {18:2} And he lift up his
eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him: and when he saw
[them,] he ran to meet them from the tent door, and bowed himself
toward the ground, {18:3} And said, My Lord, if now I have found favour
in thy sight, pass not away, I pray thee, from thy servant: {18:4} Let
a little water, I pray you, be fetched, and wash your feet, and rest
yourselves under the tree: {18:5} And I will fetch a morsel of bread,
and comfort ye your hearts; after that ye shall pass on: for therefore
are ye come to your servant. And they said, So do, as thou hast said.
{18:6} And Abraham hastened into the tent unto Sarah, and said, Make
ready quickly three measures of fine meal, knead [it,] and make cakes
upon the hearth. {18:7} And Abraham ran unto the herd, and fetcht a
calf tender and good, and gave [it] unto a young man; and he hasted to
dress it. {18:8} And he took butter, and milk, and the calf which he
had dressed, and set [it] before them; and he stood by them under the
tree, and they did eat.

   {18:9} And they said unto him, Where [is] Sarah thy wife? And he
said, Behold, in the tent. {18:10} And he said, I will certainly return
unto thee according to the time of life; and, lo, Sarah thy wife shall
have a son. And Sarah heard [it] in the tent door, which [was] behind
him. {18:11} Now Abraham and Sarah [were] old [and] well stricken in
age; [and] it ceased to be with Sarah after the manner of women.
{18:12} Therefore Sarah laughed within herself, saying, After I am
waxed old shall I have pleasure, my lord being old also? {18:13} And
the LORD said unto Abraham, Wherefore did Sarah laugh, saying, Shall I
of a surety bear a child, which am old? {18:14} Is any thing too hard
for the LORD? At the time appointed I will return unto thee, according
to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son. {18:15} Then Sarah
denied, saying, I laughed not; for she was afraid. And he said, Nay;
but thou didst laugh.

   {18:16} And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward Sodom:
and Abraham went with them to bring them on the way. {18:17} And the
LORD said, Shall I hide from Abraham that thing which I do; {18:18}
Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty nation, and
all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him? {18:19} For I
know him, that he will command his children and his household after
him, and they shall keep the way of the LORD, to do justice and
judgment; that the LORD may bring upon Abraham that which he hath
spoken of him. {18:20} And the LORD said, Because the cry of Sodom and
Gomorrah is great, and because their sin is very grievous; {18:21} I
will go down now, and see whether they have done altogether according
to the cry of it, which is come unto me; and if not, I will know.
{18:22} And the men turned their faces from thence, and went toward
Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the LORD. {18:23} And Abraham drew
near, and said, Wilt thou also destroy the righteous with the wicked?
{18:24} Peradventure there be fifty righteous within the city: wilt
thou also destroy and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that
[are] therein? {18:25} That be far from thee to do after this manner,
to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be
as the wicked, that be far from thee: Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right? {18:26} And the LORD said, If I find in Sodom fifty
righteous within the city, then I will spare all the place for their
sakes. {18:27} And Abraham answered and said, Behold now, I have taken
upon me to speak unto the Lord, which [am but] dust and ashes: {18:28}
Peradventure there shall lack five of the fifty righteous: wilt thou
destroy all the city for [lack of] five? And he said, If I find there
forty and five, I will not destroy [it. ]{18:29} And he spake unto him
yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty found there. And
he said, I will not do [it] for forty's sake. {18:30} And he said [unto
him,] Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak: Peradventure
there shall thirty be found there. And he said, I will not do [it,] if
I find thirty there. {18:31} And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon
me to speak unto the Lord: Peradventure there shall be twenty found
there. And he said, I will not destroy [it] for twenty's sake. {18:32}
And he said, Oh let not the Lord be angry, and I will speak yet but
this once: Peradventure ten shall be found there. And he said, I will
not destroy [it] for ten's sake. {18:33} And the LORD went his way, as
soon as he had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned unto
his place.

   {19:1} And there came two angels to Sodom at even; and Lot sat in
the gate of Sodom: and Lot seeing [them] rose up to meet them; and he
bowed himself with his face toward the ground; {19:2} And he said,
Behold now, my lords, turn in, I pray you, into your servant's house,
and tarry all night, and wash your feet, and ye shall rise up early,
and go on your ways. And they said, Nay; but we will abide in the
street all night. {19:3} And he pressed upon them greatly; and they
turned in unto him, and entered into his house; and he made them a
feast, and did bake unleavened bread, and they did eat.

   {19:4} But before they lay down, the men of the city, [even] the men
of Sodom, compassed the house round, both old and young, all the people
from every quarter: {19:5} And they called unto Lot, and said unto him,
Where [are] the men which came in to thee this night? bring them out
unto us, that we may know them. {19:6} And Lot went out at the door
unto them, and shut the door after him, {19:7} And said, I pray you,
brethren, do not so wickedly. {19:8} Behold now, I have two daughters
which have not known man; let me, I pray you, bring them out unto you,
and do ye to them as [is] good in your eyes: only unto these men do
nothing; for therefore came they under the shadow of my roof. {19:9}
And they said, Stand back. And they said [again,] This one [fellow]
came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a judge: now will we deal
worse with thee, than with them. And they pressed sore upon the man,
[even] Lot, and came near to break the door. {19:10} But the men put
forth their hand, and pulled Lot into the house to them, and shut to
the door. {19:11} And they smote the men that [were] at the door of the
house with blindness, both small and great: so that they wearied
themselves to find the door.

   {19:12} And the men said unto Lot, Hast thou here any besides? son
in law, and thy sons, and thy daughters, and whatsoever thou hast in
the city, bring [them] out of this place: {19:13} For we will destroy
this place, because the cry of them is waxen great before the face of
the LORD; and the LORD hath sent us to destroy it. {19:14} And Lot went
out, and spake unto his sons in law, which married his daughters, and
said, Up, get you out of this place; for the LORD will destroy this
city. But he seemed as one that mocked unto his sons in law.

   {19:15} And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened Lot,
saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters, which are here;
lest thou be consumed in the iniquity of the city. {19:16} And while he
lingered, the men laid hold upon his hand, and upon the hand of his
wife, and upon the hand of his two daughters; the LORD being merciful
unto him: and they brought him forth, and set him without the city.

   {19:17} And it came to pass, when they had brought them forth
abroad, that he said, Escape for thy life; look not behind thee,
neither stay thou in all the plain; escape to the mountain, lest thou
be consumed. {19:18} And Lot said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord:
{19:19} Behold now, thy servant hath found grace in thy sight, and thou
hast magnified thy mercy, which thou hast shewed unto me in saving my
life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest some evil take me, and
I die: {19:20} Behold now, this city is near to flee unto, and it is a
little one: Oh, let me escape thither, ([is] it not a little one?) and
my soul shall live. {19:21} And he said unto him, See, I have accepted
thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow this city,
for the which thou hast spoken. {19:22} Haste thee, escape thither; for
I cannot do any thing till thou be come thither. Therefore the name of
the city was called Zoar.

   {19:23} The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into Zoar.
{19:24} Then the LORD rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrah brimstone and
fire from the LORD out of heaven; {19:25} And he overthrew those
cities, and all the plain, and all the inhabitants of the cities, and
that which grew upon the ground.

   {19:26} But his wife looked back from behind him, and she became a
pillar of salt.

   {19:27} And Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where
he stood before the LORD: {19:28} And he looked toward Sodom and
Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and, lo,
the smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace.

   {19:29} And it came to pass, when God destroyed the cities of the
plain, that God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of the midst of
the overthrow, when he overthrew the cities in the which Lot dwelt.

   {19:30} And Lot went up out of Zoar, and dwelt in the mountain, and
his two daughters with him; for he feared to dwell in Zoar: and he
dwelt in a cave, he and his two daughters. {19:31} And the firstborn
said unto the younger, Our father [is] old, and [there is] not a man in
the earth to come in unto us after the manner of all the earth: {19:32}
Come, let us make our father drink wine, and we will lie with him, that
we may preserve seed of our father. {19:33} And they made their father
drink wine that night: and the firstborn went in, and lay with her
father; and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose.
{19:34} And it came to pass on the morrow, that the firstborn said unto
the younger, Behold, I lay yesternight with my father: let us make him
drink wine this night also; and go thou in, [and] lie with him, that we
may preserve seed of our father. {19:35} And they made their father
drink wine that night also: and the younger arose, and lay with him;
and he perceived not when she lay down, nor when she arose. {19:36}
Thus were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father. {19:37}
And the firstborn bare a son, and called his name Moab: the same [is]
the father of the Moabites unto this day. {19:38} And the younger, she
also bare a son, and called his name Benammi: the same [is] the father
of the children of Ammon unto this day.

   {20:1} And Abraham journeyed from thence toward the south country,
and dwelled between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned in Gerar. {20:2} And
Abraham said of Sarah his wife, She [is] my sister: and Abimelech king
of Gerar sent, and took Sarah. {20:3} But God came to Abimelech in a
dream by night, and said to him, Behold, thou [art but] a dead man, for
the woman which thou hast taken; for she [is] a man's wife. {20:4} But
Abimelech had not come near her: and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also
a righteous nation? {20:5} Said he not unto me, She [is] my sister? and
she, even she herself said, He [is] my brother: in the integrity of my
heart and innocency of my hands have I done this. {20:6} And God said
unto him in a dream, Yea, I know that thou didst this in the integrity
of thy heart; for I also withheld thee from sinning against me:
therefore suffered I thee not to touch her. {20:7} Now therefore
restore the man [his] wife; for he [is] a prophet, and he shall pray
for thee, and thou shalt live: and if thou restore [her] not, know thou
that thou shalt surely die, thou, and all that [are] thine. {20:8}
Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning, and called all his
servants, and told all these things in their ears: and the men were
sore afraid. {20:9} Then Abimelech called Abraham, and said unto him,
What hast thou done unto us? and what have I offended thee, that thou
hast brought on me and on my kingdom a great sin? thou hast done deeds
unto me that ought not to be done. {20:10} And Abimelech said unto
Abraham, What sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing? {20:11} And
Abraham said, Because I thought, Surely the fear of God [is] not in
this place; and they will slay me for my wife's sake. {20:12} And yet
indeed [she is] my sister; she [is] the daughter of my father, but not
the daughter of my mother; and she became my wife. {20:13} And it came
to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's house, that I
said unto her, This [is] thy kindness which thou shalt shew unto me; at
every place whither we shall come, say of me, He [is] my brother.
{20:14} And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and
womenservants, and gave [them] unto Abraham, and restored him Sarah his
wife. {20:15} And Abimelech said, Behold, my land [is] before thee:
dwell where it pleaseth thee. {20:16} And unto Sarah he said, Behold, I
have given thy brother a thousand [pieces] of silver: behold, he [is]
to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that [are] with thee, and with
all [other:] thus she was reproved.

   {20:17} So Abraham prayed unto God: and God healed Abimelech, and
his wife, and his maidservants; and they bare [children. ]{20:18} For
the LORD had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of Abimelech,
because of Sarah Abraham's wife.

   {21:1} And the LORD visited Sarah as he had said, and the LORD did
unto Sarah as he had spoken. {21:2} For Sarah conceived, and bare
Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken
to him. {21:3} And Abraham called the name of his son that was born
unto him, whom Sarah bare to him, Isaac. {21:4} And Abraham circumcised
his son Isaac being eight days old, as God had commanded him. {21:5}
And Abraham was an hundred years old, when his son Isaac was born unto
him.

   {21:6} And Sarah said, God hath made me to laugh, [so that] all that
hear will laugh with me. {21:7} And she said, Who would have said unto
Abraham, that Sarah should have given children suck? for I have born
[him] a son in his old age. {21:8} And the child grew, and was weaned:
and Abraham made a great feast the [same] day that Isaac was weaned.

   {21:9} And Sarah saw the son of Hagar the Egyptian, which she had
born unto Abraham, mocking. {21:10} Wherefore she said unto Abraham,
Cast out this bondwoman and her son: for the son of this bondwoman
shall not be heir with my son, [even] with Isaac. {21:11} And the thing
was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son.

   {21:12} And God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy
sight because of the lad, and because of thy bondwoman; in all that
Sarah hath said unto thee, hearken unto her voice; for in Isaac shall
thy seed be called. {21:13} And also of the son of the bondwoman will I
make a nation, because he [is] thy seed. {21:14} And Abraham rose up
early in the morning, and took bread, and a bottle of water, and gave
[it] unto Hagar, putting [it] on her shoulder, and the child, and sent
her away: and she departed, and wandered in the wilderness of
Beer-sheba. {21:15} And the water was spent in the bottle, and she cast
the child under one of the shrubs. {21:16} And she went, and sat her
down over against [him] a good way off, as it were a bowshot: for she
said, Let me not see the death of the child. And she sat over against
[him,] and lift up her voice, and wept. {21:17} And God heard the voice
of the lad; and the angel of God called Hagar out of heaven, and said
unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? fear not; for God hath heard the
voice of the lad where he [is. ]{21:18} Arise, lift up the lad, and
hold him in thine hand; for I will make him a great nation. {21:19} And
God opened her eyes, and she saw a well of water; and she went, and
filled the bottle with water, and gave the lad drink. {21:20} And God
was with the lad; and he grew, and dwelt in the wilderness, and became
an archer. {21:21} And he dwelt in the wilderness of Paran: and his
mother took him a wife out of the land of Egypt.

   {21:22} And it came to pass at that time, that Abimelech and Phichol
the chief captain of his host spake unto Abraham, saying, God [is] with
thee in all that thou doest: {21:23} Now therefore swear unto me here
by God that thou wilt not deal falsely with me, nor with my son, nor
with my son's son: [but] according to the kindness that I have done
unto thee, thou shalt do unto me, and to the land wherein thou hast
sojourned. {21:24} And Abraham said, I will swear. {21:25} And Abraham
reproved Abimelech because of a well of water, which Abimelech's
servants had violently taken away. {21:26} And Abimelech said, I wot
not who hath done this thing: neither didst thou tell me, neither yet
heard I [of it,] but to day. {21:27} And Abraham took sheep and oxen,
and gave them unto Abimelech; and both of them made a covenant. {21:28}
And Abraham set seven ewe lambs of the flock by themselves. {21:29} And
Abimelech said unto Abraham, What [mean] these seven ewe lambs which
thou hast set by themselves? {21:30} And he said, For [these] seven ewe
lambs shalt thou take of my hand, that they may be a witness unto me,
that I have digged this well. {21:31} Wherefore he called that place
Beer-sheba; because there they sware both of them. {21:32} Thus they
made a covenant at Beer-sheba: then Abimelech rose up, and Phichol the
chief captain of his host, and they returned into the land of the
Philistines.

   {21:33} And [Abraham] planted a grove in Beer-sheba, and called
there on the name of the LORD, the everlasting God. {21:34} And Abraham
sojourned in the Philistines' land many days.

   {22:1} And it came to pass after these things, that God did tempt
Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said, Behold, [here] I [am.
]{22:2} And he said, Take now thy son, thine only [son] Isaac, whom
thou lovest, and get thee into the land of Moriah; and offer him there
for a burnt offering upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee
of.

   {22:3} And Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his
ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac his son, and
clave the wood for the burnt offering, and rose up, and went unto the
place of which God had told him. {22:4} Then on the third day Abraham
lifted up his eyes, and saw the place afar off. {22:5} And Abraham said
unto his young men, Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the lad will
go yonder and worship, and come again to you, {22:6} And Abraham took
the wood of the burnt offering, and laid [it] upon Isaac his son; and
he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; and they went both of them
together. {22:7} And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My
father: and he said, Here [am] I, my son. And he said, Behold the fire
and the wood: but where [is] the lamb for a burnt offering? {22:8} And
Abraham said, My son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt
offering: so they went both of them together. {22:9} And they came to
the place which God had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there,
and laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and laid him on
the altar upon the wood. {22:10} And Abraham stretched forth his hand,
and took the knife to slay his son. {22:11} And the angel of the LORD
called unto him out of heaven, and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said,
Here [am] I. {22:12} And he said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad,
neither do thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest
God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only [son] from me.
{22:13} And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked, and behold behind
[him] a ram caught in a thicket by his horns: and Abraham went and took
the ram, and offered him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his
son. {22:14} And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh:
as it is said [to] this day, In the mount of the LORD it shall be seen.

   {22:15} And the angel of the LORD called unto Abraham out of heaven
the second time, {22:16} And said, By myself have I sworn, saith the
LORD, for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy
son, thine only [son: ]{22:17} That in blessing I will bless thee, and
in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven, and
as the sand which [is] upon the sea shore; and thy seed shall possess
the gate of his enemies; {22:18} And in thy seed shall all the nations
of the earth be blessed; because thou hast obeyed my voice. {22:19} So
Abraham returned unto his young men, and they rose up and went together
to Beer-sheba; and Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba.

   {22:20} And it came to pass after these things, that it was told
Abraham, saying, Behold, Milcah, she hath also born children unto thy
brother Nahor; {22:21} Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother, and
Kemuel the father of Aram, {22:22} And Chesed, and Hazo, and Pildash,
and Jidlaph, and Bethuel. {22:23} And Bethuel begat Rebekah: these
eight Milcah did bear to Nahor, Abraham's brother. {22:24} And his
concubine, whose name [was] Reumah, she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and
Thahash, and Maachah.

   {23:1} And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old:
[these were] the years of the life of Sarah. {23:2} And Sarah died in
Kirjath-arba; the same [is] Hebron in the land of Canaan: and Abraham
came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her.

   {23:3} And Abraham stood up from before his dead, and spake unto the
sons of Heth, saying, {23:4} I [am] a stranger and a sojourner with
you: give me a possession of a buryingplace with you, that I may bury
my dead out of my sight. {23:5} And the children of Heth answered
Abraham, saying unto him, {23:6} Hear us, my lord: thou [art] a mighty
prince among us: in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; none of
us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest bury
thy dead. {23:7} And Abraham stood up, and bowed himself to the people
of the land, [even] to the children of Heth. {23:8} And he communed
with them, saying, If it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of
my sight; hear me, and intreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar,
{23:9} That he may give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath, which
[is] in the end of his field; for as much money as it is worth he shall
give it me for a possession of a buryingplace amongst you. {23:10} And
Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth: and Ephron the Hittite
answered Abraham in the audience of the children of Heth, [even] of all
that went in at the gate of his city, saying, {23:11} Nay, my lord,
hear me: the field give I thee, and the cave that [is] therein, I give
it thee; in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee: bury
thy dead. {23:12} And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of
the land. {23:13} And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the
people of the land, saying, But if thou [wilt give it,] I pray thee,
hear me: I will give thee money for the field; take [it] of me, and I
will bury my dead there. {23:14} And Ephron answered Abraham, saying
unto him, {23:15} My lord, hearken unto me: the land [is worth] four
hundred shekels of silver; what [is] that betwixt me and thee? bury
therefore thy dead. {23:16} And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron; and
Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver, which he had named in the
audience of the sons of Heth, four hundred shekels of silver, current
[money] with the merchant.

   {23:17} And the field of Ephron, which [was] in Machpelah, which
[was] before Mamre, the field, and the cave which [was] therein, and
all the trees that [were] in the field, that [were] in all the borders
round about, were made sure {23:18} Unto Abraham for a possession in
the presence of the children of Heth, before all that went in at the
gate of his city. {23:19} And after this, Abraham buried Sarah his wife
in the cave of the field of Machpelah before Mamre: the same [is]
Hebron in the land of Canaan. {23:20} And the field, and the cave that
[is] therein, were made sure unto Abraham for a possession of a
buryingplace by the sons of Heth.

   {24:1} And Abraham was old, [and] well stricken in age: and the LORD
had blessed Abraham in all things. {24:2} And Abraham said unto his
eldest servant of his house, that ruled over all that he had, Put, I
pray thee, thy hand under my thigh: {24:3} And I will make thee swear
by the LORD, the God of heaven, and the God of the earth, that thou
shalt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters of the Canaanites,
among whom I dwell: {24:4} But thou shalt go unto my country, and to my
kindred, and take a wife unto my son Isaac. {24:5} And the servant said
unto him, Peradventure the woman will not be willing to follow me unto
this land: must I needs bring thy son again unto the land from whence
thou camest? {24:6} And Abraham said unto him, Beware thou that thou
bring not my son thither again.

   {24:7} The LORD God of heaven, which took me from my father's house,
and from the land of my kindred, and which spake unto me, and that
sware unto me, saying, Unto thy seed will I give this land; he shall
send his angel before thee, and thou shalt take a wife unto my son from
thence. {24:8} And if the woman will not be willing to follow thee,
then thou shalt be clear from this my oath: only bring not my son
thither again. {24:9} And the servant put his hand under the thigh of
Abraham his master, and sware to him concerning that matter.

   {24:10} And the servant took ten camels of the camels of his master,
and departed; for all the goods of his master [were] in his hand: and
he arose, and went to Mesopotamia, unto the city of Nahor. {24:11} And
he made his camels to kneel down without the city by a well of water at
the time of the evening, [even] the time that women go out to draw
[water. ]{24:12} And he said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, I pray
thee, send me good speed this day, and shew kindness unto my master
Abraham. {24:13} Behold, I stand [here] by the well of water; and the
daughters of the men of the city come out to draw water: {24:14} And
let it come to pass, that the damsel to whom I shall say, Let down thy
pitcher, I pray thee, that I may drink; and she shall say, Drink, and I
will give thy camels drink also: [let the same be] she [that] thou hast
appointed for thy servant Isaac; and thereby shall I know that thou
hast shewed kindness unto my master.

   {24:15} And it came to pass, before he had done speaking, that,
behold, Rebekah came out, who was born to Bethuel, son of Milcah, the
wife of Nahor, Abraham's brother, with her pitcher upon her shoulder.
{24:16} And the damsel [was] very fair to look upon, a virgin, neither
had any man known her: and she went down to the well, and filled her
pitcher, and came up. {24:17} And the servant ran to meet her, and
said, Let me, I pray thee, drink a little water of thy pitcher. {24:18}
And she said, Drink, my lord: and she hasted, and let down her pitcher
upon her hand, and gave him drink. {24:19} And when she had done giving
him drink, she said, I will draw [water] for thy camels also, until
they have done drinking. {24:20} And she hasted, and emptied her
pitcher into the trough, and ran again unto the well to draw [water,]
and drew for all his camels. {24:21} And the man wondering at her held
his peace, to wit whether the LORD had made his journey prosperous or
not. {24:22} And it came to pass, as the camels had done drinking, that
the man took a golden earring of half a shekel weight, and two
bracelets for her hands of ten [shekels] weight of gold; {24:23} And
said, Whose daughter [art] thou? tell me, I pray thee: is there room
[in] thy father's house for us to lodge in? {24:24} And she said unto
him, I [am] the daughter of Bethuel the son of Milcah, which she bare
unto Nahor. {24:25} She said moreover unto him, We have both straw and
provender enough, and room to lodge in. {24:26} And the man bowed down
his head, and worshipped the LORD. {24:27} And he said, Blessed [be]
the LORD God of my master Abraham, who hath not left destitute my
master of his mercy and his truth: I [being] in the way, the LORD led
me to the house of my master's brethren. {24:28} And the damsel ran,
and told [them of] her mother's house these things.

   {24:29} And Rebekah had a brother, and his name [was] Laban: and
Laban ran out unto the man, unto the well. {24:30} And it came to pass,
when he saw the earring and bracelets upon his sister's hands, and when
he heard the words of Rebekah his sister, saying, Thus spake the man
unto me; that he came unto the man; and, behold, he stood by the camels
at the well. {24:31} And he said, Come in, thou blessed of the LORD;
wherefore standest thou without? for I have prepared the house, and
room for the camels.

   {24:32} And the man came into the house: and he ungirded his camels,
and gave straw and provender for the camels, and water to wash his
feet, and the men's feet that [were] with him. {24:33} And there was
set [meat] before him to eat: but he said, I will not eat, until I have
told mine errand. And he said, Speak on. {24:34} And he said, I [am]
Abraham's servant. {24:35} And the LORD hath blessed my master greatly;
and he is become great: and he hath given him flocks, and herds, and
silver, and gold, and menservants, and maidservants, and camels, and
asses. {24:36} And Sarah my master's wife bare a son to my master when
she was old: and unto him hath he given all that he hath. {24:37} And
my master made me swear, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife to my son
of the daughters of the Canaanites, in whose land I dwell: {24:38} But
thou shalt go unto my father's house, and to my kindred, and take a
wife unto my son. {24:39} And I said unto my master, Peradventure the
woman will not follow me. {24:40} And he said unto me, The LORD, before
whom I walk, will send his angel with thee, and prosper thy way; and
thou shalt take a wife for my son of my kindred, and of my father's
house: {24:41} Then shalt thou be clear from [this] my oath, when thou
comest to my kindred; and if they give not thee [one,] thou shalt be
clear from my oath. {24:42} And I came this day unto the well, and
said, O LORD God of my master Abraham, if now thou do prosper my way
which I go; {24:43} Behold, I stand by the well of water; and it shall
come to pass, that when the virgin cometh forth to draw [water,] and I
say to her, Give me, I pray thee, a little water of thy pitcher to
drink; {24:44} And she say to me, Both drink thou, and I will also draw
for thy camels: [let] the same [be] the woman whom the LORD hath
appointed out for my master's son. {24:45} And before I had done
speaking in mine heart, behold, Rebekah came forth with her pitcher on
her shoulder; and she went down unto the well, and drew [water:] and I
said unto her, Let me drink, I pray thee. {24:46} And she made haste,
and let down her pitcher from her [shoulder,] and said, Drink, and I
will give thy camels drink also: so I drank, and she made the camels
drink also. {24:47} And I asked her, and said, Whose daughter [art]
thou? And she said, The daughter of Bethuel, Nahor's son, whom Milcah
bare unto him: and I put the earring upon her face, and the bracelets
upon her hands. {24:48} And I bowed down my head, and worshipped the
LORD, and blessed the LORD God of my master Abraham, which had led me
in the right way to take my master's brother's daughter unto his son.
{24:49} And now if ye will deal kindly and truly with my master, tell
me: and if not, tell me; that I may turn to the right hand, or to the
left. {24:50} Then Laban and Bethuel answered and said, The thing
proceedeth from the LORD: we cannot speak unto thee bad or good.
{24:51} Behold, Rebekah [is] before thee, take [her,] and go, and let
her be thy master's son's wife, as the LORD hath spoken. {24:52} And it
came to pass, that, when Abraham's servant heard their words, he
worshipped the LORD, [bowing himself] to the earth. {24:53} And the
servant brought forth jewels of silver, and jewels of gold, and
raiment, and gave [them] to Rebekah: he gave also to her brother and to
her mother precious things. {24:54} And they did eat and drink, he and
the men that [were] with him, and tarried all night; and they rose up
in the morning, and he said, Send me away unto my master. {24:55} And
her brother and her mother said, Let the damsel abide with us [a few]
days, at the least ten; after that she shall go. {24:56} And he said
unto them, Hinder me not, seeing the LORD hath prospered my way; send
me away that I may go to my master. {24:57} And they said, We will call
the damsel, and enquire at her mouth. {24:58} And they called Rebekah,
and said unto her, Wilt thou go with this man? And she said, I will go.
{24:59} And they sent away Rebekah their sister, and her nurse, and
Abraham's servant, and his men. {24:60} And they blessed Rebekah, and
said unto her, Thou [art] our sister, be thou [the mother] of thousands
of millions, and let thy seed possess the gate of those which hate them.

   {24:61} And Rebekah arose, and her damsels, and they rode upon the
camels, and followed the man: and the servant took Rebekah, and went
his way. {24:62} And Isaac came from the way of the well Lahai-roi; for
he dwelt in the south country. {24:63} And Isaac went out to meditate
in the field at the eventide: and he lifted up his eyes, and saw, and,
behold, the camels [were] coming. {24:64} And Rebekah lifted up her
eyes, and when she saw Isaac, she lighted off the camel. {24:65} For
she [had] said unto the servant, What man [is] this that walketh in the
field to meet us? And the servant [had] said, It [is] my master:
therefore she took a vail, and covered herself. {24:66} And the servant
told Isaac all things that he had done. {24:67} And Isaac brought her
into his mother Sarah's tent, and took Rebekah, and she became his
wife; and he loved her: and Isaac was comforted after his mother's
[death.]

   {25:1} Then again Abraham took a wife, and her name [was] Keturah.
{25:2} And she bare him Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and
Ishbak, and Shuah. {25:3} And Jokshan begat Sheba, and Dedan. And the
sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim. {25:4} And the
sons of Midian; Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah.
All these [were] the children of Keturah.

   {25:5} And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac. {25:6} But unto
the sons of the concubines, which Abraham had, Abraham gave gifts, and
sent them away from Isaac his son, while he yet lived, eastward, unto
the east country. {25:7} And these [are] the days of the years of
Abraham's life which he lived, an hundred threescore and fifteen years.
{25:8} Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old age, an
old man, and full [of years;] and was gathered to his people. {25:9}
And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in
the field of Ephron the son of Zohar the Hittite, which [is] before
Mamre; {25:10} The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth:
there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife.

   {25:11} And it came to pass after the death of Abraham, that God
blessed his son Isaac; and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahai-roi.

   {25:12} Now these [are] the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son,
whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham: {25:13}
And these [are] the names of the sons of Ishmael, by their names,
according to their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth; and
Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam, {25:14} And Mishma, and Dumah, and
Massa, {25:15} Hadar, and Tema, Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah: {25:16}
These [are] the sons of Ishmael, and these [are] their names, by their
towns, and by their castles; twelve princes according to their nations.
{25:17} And these [are] the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred
and thirty and seven years: and he gave up the ghost and died; and was
gathered unto his people. {25:18} And they dwelt from Havilah unto
Shur, that [is] before Egypt, as thou goest toward Assyria: [and] he
died in the presence of all his brethren.

   {25:19} And these [are] the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son:
Abraham begat Isaac: {25:20} And Isaac was forty years old when he took
Rebekah to wife, the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian of Padan-aram, the
sister to Laban the Syrian. {25:21} And Isaac intreated the LORD for
his wife, because she [was] barren: and the LORD was intreated of him,
and Rebekah his wife conceived. {25:22} And the children struggled
together within her; and she said, If [it be] so, why [am] I thus? And
she went to enquire of the LORD. {25:23} And the LORD said unto her,
Two nations [are] in thy womb, and two manner of people shall be
separated from thy bowels; and [the one] people shall be stronger than
[the other] people; and the elder shall serve the younger.

   {25:24} And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled, behold,
[there were] twins in her womb. {25:25} And the first came out red, all
over like an hairy garment; and they called his name Esau. {25:26} And
after that came his brother out, and his hand took hold on Esau's heel;
and his name was called Jacob: and Isaac [was] threescore years old
when she bare them. {25:27} And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning
hunter, a man of the field; and Jacob [was] a plain man, dwelling in
tents. {25:28} And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of [his]
venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob.

   {25:29} And Jacob sod pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he
[was] faint: {25:30} And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with
that same red [pottage;] for I [am] faint: therefore was his name
called Edom. {25:31} And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy birthright.
{25:32} And Esau said, Behold, I [am] at the point to die: and what
profit shall this birthright do to me? {25:33} And Jacob said, Swear to
me this day; and he sware unto him: and he sold his birthright unto
Jacob. {25:34} Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and
he did eat and drink, and rose up, and went his way: thus Esau despised
[his] birthright.

   {26:1} And there was a famine in the land, beside the first famine
that was in the days of Abraham. And Isaac went unto Abimelech king of
the Philistines unto Gerar. {26:2} And the LORD appeared unto him, and
said, Go not down into Egypt; dwell in the land which I shall tell thee
of: {26:3} Sojourn in this land, and I will be with thee, and will
bless thee; for unto thee, and unto thy seed, I will give all these
countries, and I will perform the oath which I sware unto Abraham thy
father; {26:4} And I will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of
heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these countries; and in thy
seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed; {26:5} Because that
Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my
statutes, and my laws.

   {26:6} And Isaac dwelt in Gerar: {26:7} And the men of the place
asked [him] of his wife; and he said, She [is] my sister: for he feared
to say, [She is] my wife; lest, [said he,] the men of the place should
kill me for Rebekah; because she [was] fair to look upon. {26:8} And it
came to pass, when he had been there a long time, that Abimelech king
of the Philistines looked out at a window, and saw, and, behold, Isaac
[was] sporting with Rebekah his wife. {26:9} And Abimelech called
Isaac, and said, Behold, of a surety she [is] thy wife: and how saidst
thou, She [is] my sister? And Isaac said unto him, Because I said, Lest
I die for her. {26:10} And Abimelech said, What [is] this thou hast
done unto us? one of the people might lightly have lien with thy wife,
and thou shouldest have brought guiltiness upon us. {26:11} And
Abimelech charged all [his] people, saying, He that toucheth this man
or his wife shall surely be put to death. {26:12} Then Isaac sowed in
that land, and received in the same year an hundredfold: and the LORD
blessed him. {26:13} And the man waxed great, and went forward, and
grew until he became very great: {26:14} For he had possession of
flocks, and possession of herds, and great store of servants: and the
Philistines envied him. {26:15} For all the wells which his father's
servants had digged in the days of Abraham his father, the Philistines
had stopped them, and filled them with earth. {26:16} And Abimelech
said unto Isaac, Go from us; for thou art much mightier than we.

   {26:17} And Isaac departed thence, and pitched his tent in the
valley of Gerar, and dwelt there. {26:18} And Isaac digged again the
wells of water, which they had digged in the days of Abraham his
father; for the philistines had stopped them after the death of
Abraham: and he called their names after the names by which his father
had called them. {26:19} And Isaac's servants digged in the valley, and
found there a well of springing water. {26:20} And the herdmen of Gerar
did strive with Isaac's herdmen, saying, The water [is] ours: and he
called the name of the well Esek; because they strove with him. {26:21}
And they digged another well, and strove for that also: and he called
the name of it Sitnah. {26:22} And he removed from thence, and digged
another well; and for that they strove not: and he called the name of
it Rehoboth; and he said, For now the LORD hath made room for us, and
we shall be fruitful in the land. {26:23} And he went up from thence to
Beer-sheba. {26:24} And the LORD appeared unto him the same night, and
said, I [am] the God of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I [am] with
thee, and will bless thee, and multiply thy seed for my servant
Abraham's sake. {26:25} And he builded an altar there, and called upon
the name of the LORD and pitched his tent there: and there Isaac's
servants digged a well.

   {26:26} Then Abimelech went to him from Gerar, and Ahuzzath one of
his friends, and Phichol the chief captain of his army. {26:27} And
Isaac said unto them, Wherefore come ye to me, seeing ye hate me, and
have sent me away from you? {26:28} And they said, We saw certainly
that the LORD was with thee: and we said, Let there be now an oath
betwixt us, [even] betwixt us and thee, and let us make a covenant with
thee; {26:29} That thou wilt do us no hurt, as we have not touched
thee, and as we have done unto thee nothing but good, and have sent
thee away in peace: thou [art] now the blessed of the LORD. {26:30} And
he made them a feast, and they did eat and drink. {26:31} And they rose
up betimes in the morning, and sware one to another: and Isaac sent
them away, and they departed from him in peace. {26:32} And it came to
pass the same day, that Isaac's servants came, and told him concerning
the well which they had digged, and said unto him, We have found water.
{26:33} And he called it Shebah: therefore the name of the city [is]
Beer-sheba unto this day.

   {26:34} And Esau was forty years old when he took to wife Judith the
daughter of Beeri the Hittite, and Bashemath the daughter of Elon the
Hittite: {26:35} Which were a grief of mind unto Isaac and to Rebekah.

   {27:1} And it came to pass, that when Isaac was old, and his eyes
were dim, so that he could not see, he called Esau his eldest son, and
said unto him, My son: and he said unto him, Behold, [here am] I.
{27:2} And he said, Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my
death: {27:3} Now therefore take, I pray thee, thy weapons, thy quiver
and thy bow, and go out to the field, and take me [some] venison;
{27:4} And make me savoury meat, such as I love, and bring [it] to me,
that I may eat; that my soul may bless thee before I die. {27:5} And
Rebekah heard when Isaac spake to Esau his son. And Esau went to the
field to hunt [for] venison, [and] to bring [it.]

   {27:6} And Rebekah spake unto Jacob her son, saying, Behold, I heard
thy father speak unto Esau thy brother, saying, {27:7} Bring me
venison, and make me savoury meat, that I may eat, and bless thee
before the LORD before my death. {27:8} Now therefore, my son, obey my
voice according to that which I command thee. {27:9} Go now to the
flock, and fetch me from thence two good kids of the goats; and I will
make them savoury meat for thy father, such as he loveth: {27:10} And
thou shalt bring [it] to thy father, that he may eat, and that he may
bless thee before his death. {27:11} And Jacob said to Rebekah his
mother, Behold, Esau my brother [is] a hairy man, and I [am] a smooth
man: {27:12} My father peradventure will feel me, and I shall seem to
him as a deceiver; and I shall bring a curse upon me, and not a
blessing. {27:13} And his mother said unto him, Upon me [be] thy curse,
my son: only obey my voice, and go fetch me [them. ]{27:14} And he
went, and fetched, and brought [them] to his mother: and his mother
made savoury meat, such as his father loved. {27:15} And Rebekah took
goodly raiment of her eldest son Esau, which [were] with her in the
house, and put them upon Jacob her younger son: {27:16} And she put the
skins of the kids of the goats upon his hands, and upon the smooth of
his neck: {27:17} And she gave the savoury meat and the bread, which
she had prepared, into the hand of her son Jacob.

   {27:18} And he came unto his father, and said, My father: and he
said, Here [am] I; who [art] thou, my son? {27:19} And Jacob said unto
his father, I [am] Esau thy firstborn; I have done according as thou
badest me: arise, I pray thee, sit and eat of my venison, that thy soul
may bless me. {27:20} And Isaac said unto his son, How [is it] that
thou hast found [it] so quickly, my son? And he said, Because the LORD
thy God brought [it] to me. {27:21} And Isaac said unto Jacob, Come
near, I pray thee, that I may feel thee, my son, whether thou [be] my
very son Esau or not. {27:22} And Jacob went near unto Isaac his
father; and he felt him, and said, The voice [is] Jacob's voice, but
the hands [are] the hands of Esau. {27:23} And he discerned him not,
because his hands were hairy, as his brother Esau's hands: so he
blessed him. {27:24} And he said, [Art] thou my very son Esau? And he
said, I [am. ]{27:25} And he said, Bring [it] near to me, and I will
eat of my son's venison, that my soul may bless thee. And he brought
[it] near to him, and he did eat: and he brought him wine, and he
drank. {27:26} And his father Isaac said unto him, Come near now, and
kiss me, my son. {27:27} And he came near, and kissed him: and he
smelled the smell of his raiment, and blessed him, and said, See, the
smell of my son [is] as the smell of a field which the LORD hath
blessed: {27:28} Therefore God give thee of the dew of heaven, and the
fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and wine: {27:29} Let people
serve thee, and nations bow down to thee: be lord over thy brethren,
and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee: cursed [be] every one that
curseth thee, and blessed [be] he that blesseth thee.

   {27:30} And it came to pass, as soon as Isaac had made an end of
blessing Jacob, and Jacob was yet scarce gone out from the presence of
Isaac his father, that Esau his brother came in from his hunting.
{27:31} And he also had made savoury meat, and brought it unto his
father, and said unto his father, Let my father arise, and eat of his
son's venison, that thy soul may bless me. {27:32} And Isaac his father
said unto him, Who [art] thou? And he said, I [am] thy son, thy
firstborn Esau. {27:33} And Isaac trembled very exceedingly, and said,
Who? where [is] he that hath taken venison, and brought [it] me, and I
have eaten of all before thou camest, and have blessed him? yea, [and]
he shall be blessed. {27:34} And when Esau heard the words of his
father, he cried with a great and exceeding bitter cry, and said unto
his father, Bless me, [even] me also, O my father. {27:35} And he said,
Thy brother came with subtilty, and hath taken away thy blessing.
{27:36} And he said, Is not he rightly named Jacob? for he hath
supplanted me these two times: he took away my birthright; and, behold,
now he hath taken away my blessing. And he said, Hast thou not reserved
a blessing for me? {27:37} And Isaac answered and said unto Esau,
Behold, I have made him thy lord, and all his brethren have I given to
him for servants; and with corn and wine have I sustained him: and what
shall I do now unto thee, my son? {27:38} And Esau said unto his
father, Hast thou but one blessing, my father? bless me, [even] me
also, O my father. And Esau lifted up his voice, and wept. {27:39} And
Isaac his father answered and said unto him, Behold, thy dwelling shall
be the fatness of the earth, and of the dew of heaven from above;
{27:40} And by thy sword shalt thou live, and shalt serve thy brother;
and it shall come to pass when thou shalt have the dominion, that thou
shalt break his yoke from off thy neck.

   {27:41} And Esau hated Jacob because of the blessing wherewith his
father blessed him: and Esau said in his heart, The days of mourning
for my father are at hand; then will I slay my brother Jacob. {27:42}
And these words of Esau her elder son were told to Rebekah: and she
sent and called Jacob her younger son, and said unto him, Behold, thy
brother Esau, as touching thee, doth comfort himself, [purposing] to
kill thee. {27:43} Now therefore, my son, obey my voice; and arise,
flee thou to Laban my brother to Haran; {27:44} And tarry with him a
few days, until thy brother's fury turn away; {27:45} Until thy
brother's anger turn away from thee, and he forget [that] which thou
hast done to him: then I will send, and fetch thee from thence: why
should I be deprived also of you both in one day? {27:46} And Rebekah
said to Isaac, I am weary of my life because of the daughters of Heth:
if Jacob take a wife of the daughters of Heth, such as these [which
are] of the daughters of the land, what good shall my life do me?

   {28:1} And Isaac called Jacob, and blessed him, and charged him, and
said unto him, Thou shalt not take a wife of the daughters of Canaan.
{28:2} Arise, go to Padan-aram, to the house of Bethuel thy mother's
father; and take thee a wife from thence of the daughters of Laban thy
mother's brother. {28:3} And God Almighty bless thee, and make thee
fruitful, and multiply thee, that thou mayest be a multitude of people;
{28:4} And give thee the blessing of Abraham, to thee, and to thy seed
with thee; that thou mayest inherit the land wherein thou art a
stranger, which God gave unto Abraham. {28:5} And Isaac sent away
Jacob: and he went to Padan-aram unto Laban, son of Bethuel the Syrian,
the brother of Rebekah, Jacob's and Esau's mother.

   {28:6} When Esau saw that Isaac had blessed Jacob, and sent him away
to Padan-aram, to take him a wife from thence; and that as he blessed
him he gave him a charge, saying, Thou shalt not take a wife of the
daughters of Canaan; {28:7} And that Jacob obeyed his father and his
mother, and was gone to Padan-aram; {28:8} And Esau seeing that the
daughters of Canaan pleased not Isaac his father; {28:9} Then went Esau
unto Ishmael, and took unto the wives which he had Mahalath the
daughter of Ishmael Abraham's son, the sister of Nebajoth, to be his
wife.

   {28:10} And Jacob went out from Beer-sheba, and went toward Haran.
{28:11} And he lighted upon a certain place, and tarried there all
night, because the sun was set; and he took of the stones of that
place, and [put] them for his pillows, and lay down in that place to
sleep. {28:12} And he dreamed, and behold a ladder set up on the earth,
and the top of it reached to heaven: and behold the angels of God
ascending and descending on it. {28:13} And, behold, the LORD stood
above it, and said, I [am] the LORD God of Abraham thy father, and the
God of Isaac: the land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it, and
to thy seed; {28:14} And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth,
and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the
north, and to the south: and in thee and in thy seed shall all the
families of the earth be blessed. {28:15} And, behold, I [am] with
thee, and will keep thee in all [places] whither thou goest, and will
bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee, until I
have done [that] which I have spoken to thee of.

   {28:16} And Jacob awaked out of his sleep, and he said, Surely the
LORD is in this place; and I knew [it] not. {28:17} And he was afraid,
and said, How dreadful [is] this place! this is none other but the
house of God, and this [is] the gate of heaven. {28:18} And Jacob rose
up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put [for] his
pillows, and set it up [for] a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of
it. {28:19} And he called the name of that place Bethel: but the name
of that city [was called] Luz at the first. {28:20} And Jacob vowed a
vow, saying, If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that
I go, and will give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, {28:21} So
that I come again to my father's house in peace; then shall the LORD be
my God: {28:22} And this stone, which I have set [for] a pillar, shall
be God's house: and of all that thou shalt give me I will surely give
the tenth unto thee.

   {29:1} Then Jacob went on his journey, and came into the land of the
people of the east. {29:2} And he looked, and behold a well in the
field, and, lo, there [were] three flocks of sheep lying by it; for out
of that well they watered the flocks: and a great stone [was] upon the
well's mouth. {29:3} And thither were all the flocks gathered: and they
rolled the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the sheep, and put
the stone again upon the well's mouth in his place. {29:4} And Jacob
said unto them, My brethren, whence [be] ye? And they said, Of Haran
[are] we. {29:5} And he said unto them, Know ye Laban the son of Nahor?
And they said, We know [him. ]{29:6} And he said unto them, [Is] he
well? And they said, [He is] well: and, behold, Rachel his daughter
cometh with the sheep. {29:7} And he said, Lo, [it is] yet high day,
neither [is it] time that the cattle should be gathered together: water
ye the sheep, and go [and] feed [them. ]{29:8} And they said, We
cannot, until all the flocks be gathered together, and [till] they roll
the stone from the well's mouth; then we water the sheep.

   {29:9} And while he yet spake with them, Rachel came with her
father's sheep: for she kept them. {29:10} And it came to pass, when
Jacob saw Rachel the daughter of Laban his mother's brother, and the
sheep of Laban his mother's brother, that Jacob went near, and rolled
the stone from the well's mouth, and watered the flock of Laban his
mother's brother. {29:11} And Jacob kissed Rachel, and lifted up his
voice, and wept. {29:12} And Jacob told Rachel that he [was] her
father's brother, and that he [was] Rebekah's son: and she ran and told
her father. {29:13} And it came to pass, when Laban heard the tidings
of Jacob his sister's son, that he ran to meet him, and embraced him,
and kissed him, and brought him to his house. And he told Laban all
these things. {29:14} And Laban said to him, Surely thou [art] my bone
and my flesh. And he abode with him the space of a month.

   {29:15} And Laban said unto Jacob, Because thou [art] my brother,
shouldest thou therefore serve me for nought? tell me, what [shall] thy
wages [be? ]{29:16} And Laban had two daughters: the name of the elder
[was] Leah, and the name of the younger [was] Rachel. {29:17} Leah
[was] tender eyed; but Rachel was beautiful and well favoured. {29:18}
And Jacob loved Rachel; and said, I will serve thee seven years for
Rachel thy younger daughter. {29:19} And Laban said, [It is] better
that I give her to thee, than that I should give her to another man:
abide with me. {29:20} And Jacob served seven years for Rachel; and
they seemed unto him [but] a few days, for the love he had to her.

   {29:21} And Jacob said unto Laban, Give [me] my wife, for my days
are fulfilled, that I may go in unto her. {29:22} And Laban gathered
together all the men of the place, and made a feast. {29:23} And it
came to pass in the evening, that he took Leah his daughter, and
brought her to him; and he went in unto her. {29:24} And Laban gave
unto his daughter Leah Zilpah his maid [for] an handmaid. {29:25} And
it came to pass, that in the morning, behold, it [was] Leah: and he
said to Laban, What [is] this thou hast done unto me? did not I serve
with thee for Rachel? wherefore then hast thou beguiled me? {29:26} And
Laban said, It must not be so done in our country, to give the younger
before the firstborn. {29:27} Fulfil her week, and we will give thee
this also for the service which thou shalt serve with me yet seven
other years. {29:28} And Jacob did so, and fulfilled her week: and he
gave him Rachel his daughter to wife also. {29:29} And Laban gave to
Rachel his daughter Bilhah his handmaid to be her maid. {29:30} And he
went in also unto Rachel, and he loved also Rachel more than Leah, and
served with him yet seven other years.

   {29:31} And when the LORD saw that Leah [was] hated, he opened her
womb: but Rachel [was] barren. {29:32} And Leah conceived, and bare a
son, and she called his name Reuben: for she said, Surely the LORD hath
looked upon my affliction; now therefore my husband will love me.
{29:33} And she conceived again, and bare a son; and said, Because the
LORD hath heard that I [was] hated, he hath therefore given me this
[son] also: and she called his name Simeon. {29:34} And she conceived
again, and bare a son; and said, Now this time will my husband be
joined unto me, because I have born him three sons: therefore was his
name called Levi. {29:35} And she conceived again, and bare a son: and
she said, Now will I praise the LORD: therefore she called his name
Judah; and left bearing.

   {30:1} And when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children, Rachel
envied her sister; and said unto Jacob, Give me children, or else I
die. {30:2} And Jacob's anger was kindled against Rachel: and he said,
[Am] I in God's stead, who hath withheld from thee the fruit of the
womb? {30:3} And she said, Behold my maid Bilhah, go in unto her; and
she shall bear upon my knees that I may also have children by her.
{30:4} And she gave him Bilhah her handmaid to wife: and Jacob went in
unto her. {30:5} And Bilhah conceived, and bare Jacob a son. {30:6} And
Rachel said, God hath judged me, and hath also heard my voice, and hath
given me a son: therefore called she his name Dan. {30:7} And Bilhah
Rachel's maid conceived again, and bare Jacob a second son. {30:8} And
Rachel said, With great wrestlings have I wrestled with my sister, and
I have prevailed: and she called his name Naphtali. {30:9} When Leah
saw that she had left bearing, she took Zilpah her maid, and gave her
Jacob to wife. {30:10} And Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a son. {30:11}
And Leah said, A troop cometh: and she called his name Gad. {30:12} And
Zilpah Leah's maid bare Jacob a second son. {30:13} And Leah said,
Happy am I, for the daughters will call me blessed: and she called his
name Asher.

   {30:14} And Reuben went in the days of wheat harvest, and found
mandrakes in the field, and brought them unto his mother Leah. Then
Rachel said to Leah, Give me, I pray thee, of thy son's mandrakes.
{30:15} And she said unto her, [Is it] a small matter that thou hast
taken my husband? and wouldest thou take away my son's mandrakes also?
And Rachel said, Therefore he shall lie with thee to night for thy
son's mandrakes. {30:16} And Jacob came out of the field in the
evening, and Leah went out to meet him, and said, Thou must come in
unto me; for surely I have hired thee with my son's mandrakes. And he
lay with her that night. {30:17} And God hearkened unto Leah, and she
conceived, and bare Jacob the fifth son. {30:18} And Leah said, God
hath given me my hire, because I have given my maiden to my husband:
and she called his name Issachar. {30:19} And Leah conceived again, and
bare Jacob the sixth son. {30:20} And Leah said, God hath endued me
[with] a good dowry; now will my husband dwell with me, because I have
born him six sons: and she called his name Zebulun. {30:21} And
afterwards she bare a daughter, and called her name Dinah.

   {30:22} And God remembered Rachel, and God hearkened to her, and
opened her womb. {30:23} And she conceived, and bare a son; and said,
God hath taken away my reproach: {30:24} And she called his name
Joseph; and said, The LORD shall add to me another son.

   {30:25} And it came to pass, when Rachel had born Joseph, that Jacob
said unto Laban, Send me away, that I may go unto mine own place, and
to my country. {30:26} Give [me] my wives and my children, for whom I
have served thee, and let me go: for thou knowest my service which I
have done thee. {30:27} And Laban said unto him, I pray thee, if I have
found favour in thine eyes, [tarry: for] I have learned by experience
that the LORD hath blessed me for thy sake. {30:28} And he said,
Appoint me thy wages, and I will give [it. ]{30:29} And he said unto
him, Thou knowest how I have served thee, and how thy cattle was with
me. {30:30} For [it was] little which thou hadst before I [came,] and
it is [now] increased unto a multitude; and the LORD hath blessed thee
since my coming: and now when shall I provide for mine own house also?
{30:31} And he said, What shall I give thee? And Jacob said, Thou shalt
not give me any thing: if thou wilt do this thing for me, I will again
feed [and] keep thy flock: {30:32} I will pass through all thy flock to
day, removing from thence all the speckled and spotted cattle, and all
the brown cattle among the sheep, and the spotted and speckled among
the goats: and [of such] shall be my hire. {30:33} So shall my
righteousness answer for me in time to come, when it shall come for my
hire before thy face: every one that [is] not speckled and spotted
among the goats, and brown among the sheep, that shall be counted
stolen with me. {30:34} And Laban said, Behold, I would it might be
according to thy word. {30:35} And he removed that day the he goats
that were ringstraked and spotted, and all the she goats that were
speckled and spotted, [and] every one that had [some] white in it, and
all the brown among the sheep, and gave [them] into the hand of his
sons. {30:36} And he set three days journey betwixt himself and Jacob:
and Jacob fed the rest of Laban's flocks.

   {30:37} And Jacob took him rods of green poplar, and of the hazel
and chesnut tree; and pilled white strakes in them, and made the white
appear which [was] in the rods. {30:38} And he set the rods which he
had pilled before the flocks in the gutters in the watering troughs
when the flocks came to drink, that they should conceive when they came
to drink. {30:39} And the flocks conceived before the rods, and brought
forth cattle ringstraked, speckled, and spotted. {30:40} And Jacob did
separate the lambs, and set the faces of the flocks toward the
ringstraked, and all the brown in the flock of Laban; and he put his
own flocks by themselves, and put them not unto Laban's cattle. {30:41}
And it came to pass, whensoever the stronger cattle did conceive, that
Jacob laid the rods before the eyes of the cattle in the gutters, that
they might conceive among the rods. {30:42} But when the cattle were
feeble, he put [them] not in: so the feebler were Laban's, and the
stronger Jacob's. {30:43} And the man increased exceedingly, and had
much cattle, and maidservants, and menservants, and camels, and asses.

   {31:1} And he heard the words of Laban's sons, saying, Jacob hath
taken away all that [was] our father's; and of [that] which [was] our
father's hath he gotten all this glory. {31:2} And Jacob beheld the
countenance of Laban, and, behold, it [was] not toward him as before.
{31:3} And the LORD said unto Jacob, Return unto the land of thy
fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee. {31:4} And Jacob
sent and called Rachel and Leah to the field unto his flock, {31:5} And
said unto them, I see your father's countenance, that it [is] not
toward me as before; but the God of my father hath been with me. {31:6}
And ye know that with all my power I have served your father. {31:7}
And your father hath deceived me, and changed my wages ten times; but
God suffered him not to hurt me. {31:8} If he said thus, The speckled
shall be thy wages; then all the cattle bare speckled: and if he said
thus, The ringstraked shall be thy hire; then bare all the cattle
ringstraked. {31:9} Thus God hath taken away the cattle of your father,
and given [them] to me. {31:10} And it came to pass at the time that
the cattle conceived, that I lifted up mine eyes, and saw in a dream,
and, behold, the rams which leaped upon the cattle [were] ringstraked,
speckled, and grisled. {31:11} And the angel of God spake unto me in a
dream, [saying,] Jacob: And I said, Here [am] I. {31:12} And he said,
Lift up now thine eyes, and see, all the rams which leap upon the
cattle [are] ringstraked, speckled, and grisled: for I have seen all
that Laban doeth unto thee. {31:13} I [am] the God of Bethel, where
thou anointedst the pillar, [and] where thou vowedst a vow unto me: now
arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy
kindred. {31:14} And Rachel and Leah answered and said unto him, [Is
there] yet any portion or inheritance for us in our father's house?
{31:15} Are we not counted of him strangers? for he hath sold us, and
hath quite devoured also our money. {31:16} For all the riches which
God hath taken from our father, that [is] ours, and our children's: now
then, whatsoever God hath said unto thee, do.

   {31:17} Then Jacob rose up, and set his sons and his wives upon
camels; {31:18} And he carried away all his cattle, and all his goods
which he had gotten, the cattle of his getting, which he had gotten in
Padan-aram, for to go to Isaac his father in the land of Canaan.
{31:19} And Laban went to shear his sheep: and Rachel had stolen the
images that [were] her father's. {31:20} And Jacob stole away unawares
to Laban the Syrian, in that he told him not that he fled. {31:21} So
he fled with all that he had; and he rose up, and passed over the
river, and set his face [toward] the mount Gilead. {31:22} And it was
told Laban on the third day that Jacob was fled. {31:23} And he took
his brethren with him, and pursued after him seven days' journey; and
they overtook him in the mount Gilead. {31:24} And God came to Laban
the Syrian in a dream by night, and said unto him, Take heed that thou
speak not to Jacob either good or bad.

   {31:25} Then Laban overtook Jacob. Now Jacob had pitched his tent in
the mount: and Laban with his brethren pitched in the mount of Gilead.
{31:26} And Laban said to Jacob, What hast thou done, that thou hast
stolen away unawares to me, and carried away my daughters, as captives
[taken] with the sword? {31:27} Wherefore didst thou flee away
secretly, and steal away from me; and didst not tell me, that I might
have sent thee away with mirth, and with songs, with tabret, and with
harp? {31:28} And hast not suffered me to kiss my sons and my
daughters? thou hast now done foolishly in so doing. {31:29} It is in
the power of my hand to do you hurt: but the God of your father spake
unto me yesternight, saying, Take thou heed that thou speak not to
Jacob either good or bad. {31:30} And now, [though] thou wouldest needs
be gone, because thou sore longedst after thy father's house, [yet]
wherefore hast thou stolen my gods? {31:31} And Jacob answered and said
to Laban, Because I was afraid: for I said, Peradventure thou wouldest
take by force thy daughters from me. {31:32} With whomsoever thou
findest thy gods, let him not live: before our brethren discern thou
what [is] thine with me, and take [it] to thee. For Jacob knew not that
Rachel had stolen them. {31:33} And Laban went into Jacob's tent, and
into Leah's tent, and into the two maidservants' tents; but he found
[them] not. Then went he out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's
tent. {31:34} Now Rachel had taken the images, and put them in the
camel's furniture, and sat upon them. And Laban searched all the tent,
but found [them] not. {31:35} And she said to her father, Let it not
displease my lord that I cannot rise up before thee; for the custom of
women is upon me. And he searched, but found not the images.

   {31:36} And Jacob was wroth, and chode with Laban: and Jacob
answered and said to Laban, What [is] my trespass? what [is] my sin,
that thou hast so hotly pursued after me? {31:37} Whereas thou hast
searched all my stuff, what hast thou found of all thy household stuff?
set [it] here before my brethren and thy brethren, that they may judge
betwixt us both. {31:38} This twenty years [have] I [been] with thee;
thy ewes and thy she goats have not cast their young, and the rams of
thy flock have I not eaten. {31:39} That which was torn [of beasts] I
brought not unto thee; I bare the loss of it; of my hand didst thou
require it, [whether] stolen by day, or stolen by night. {31:40} [Thus]
I was; in the day the drought consumed me, and the frost by night; and
my sleep departed from mine eyes. {31:41} Thus have I been twenty years
in thy house; I served thee fourteen years for thy two daughters, and
six years for thy cattle: and thou hast changed my wages ten times.
{31:42} Except the God of my father, the God of Abraham, and the fear
of Isaac, had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty.
God hath seen mine affliction and the labour of my hands, and rebuked
[thee] yesternight.

   {31:43} And Laban answered and said unto Jacob, [These] daughters
[are] my daughters, and [these] children [are] my children, and [these]
cattle [are] my cattle, and all that thou seest [is] mine: and what can
I do this day unto these my daughters, or unto their children which
they have born? {31:44} Now therefore come thou, let us make a
covenant, I and thou; and let it be for a witness between me and thee.
{31:45} And Jacob took a stone, and set it up [for] a pillar. {31:46}
And Jacob said unto his brethren, Gather stones; and they took stones,
and made an heap: and they did eat there upon the heap. {31:47} And
Laban called it Jegar-sahadutha: but Jacob called it Galeed. {31:48}
And Laban said, This heap [is] a witness between me and thee this day.
Therefore was the name of it called Galeed; {31:49} And Mizpah; for he
said, The LORD watch between me and thee, when we are absent one from
another. {31:50} If thou shalt afflict my daughters, or if thou shalt
take [other] wives beside my daughters, no man [is] with us; see, God
[is] witness betwixt me and thee. {31:51} And Laban said to Jacob,
Behold this heap, and behold [this] pillar, which I have cast betwixt
me and thee; {31:52} This heap [be] witness, and [this] pillar [be]
witness, that I will not pass over this heap to thee, and that thou
shalt not pass over this heap and this pillar unto me, for harm.
{31:53} The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their
father, judge betwixt us. And Jacob sware by the fear of his father
Isaac. {31:54} Then Jacob offered sacrifice upon the mount, and called
his brethren to eat bread: and they did eat bread, and tarried all
night in the mount. {31:55} And early in the morning Laban rose up, and
kissed his sons and his daughters, and blessed them: and Laban
departed, and returned unto his place.

   {32:1} And Jacob went on his way, and the angels of God met him.
{32:2} And when Jacob saw them, he said, This [is] God's host: and he
called the name of that place Mahanaim. {32:3} And Jacob sent
messengers before him to Esau his brother unto the land of Seir, the
country of Edom. {32:4} And he commanded them, saying, Thus shall ye
speak unto my lord Esau; Thy servant Jacob saith thus, I have sojourned
with Laban, and stayed there until now: {32:5} And I have oxen, and
asses, flocks, and menservants, and womenservants: and I have sent to
tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight.

   {32:6} And the messengers returned to Jacob, saying, We came to thy
brother Esau, and also he cometh to meet thee, and four hundred men
with him. {32:7} Then Jacob was greatly afraid and distressed: and he
divided the people that [was] with him, and the flocks, and herds, and
the camels, into two bands; {32:8} And said, If Esau come to the one
company, and smite it, then the other company which is left shall
escape.

   {32:9} And Jacob said, O God of my father Abraham, and God of my
father Isaac, the LORD which saidst unto me, Return unto thy country,
and to thy kindred, and I will deal well with thee: {32:10} I am not
worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which
thou hast shewed unto thy servant; for with my staff I passed over this
Jordan; and now I am become two bands. {32:11} Deliver me, I pray thee,
from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau: for I fear him,
lest he will come and smite me, [and] the mother with the children.
{32:12} And thou saidst, I will surely do thee good, and make thy seed
as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude. {32:13}
And he lodged there that same night; and took of that which came to his
hand a present for Esau his brother; {32:14} Two hundred she goats, and
twenty he goats, two hundred ewes, and twenty rams, {32:15} Thirty
milch camels with their colts, forty kine, and ten bulls, twenty she
asses, and ten foals. {32:16} And he delivered [them] into the hand of
his servants, every drove by themselves; and said unto his servants,
Pass over before me, and put a space betwixt drove and drove. {32:17}
And he commanded the foremost, saying, When Esau my brother meeteth
thee, and asketh thee, saying, Whose [art] thou? and whither goest
thou? and whose [are] these before thee? {32:18} Then thou shalt say,
[They be] thy servant Jacob's; it [is] a present sent unto my lord
Esau: and, behold, also he [is] behind us. {32:19} And so commanded he
the second, and the third, and all that followed the droves, saying, On
this manner shall ye speak unto Esau, when ye find him. {32:20} And say
ye moreover, Behold, thy servant Jacob [is] behind us. For he said, I
will appease him with the present that goeth before me, and afterward I
will see his face; peradventure he will accept of me. {32:21} So went
the present over before him: and himself lodged that night in the
company. {32:22} And he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and
his two womenservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford
Jabbok. {32:23} And he took them, and sent them over the brook, and
sent over that he had.

   {32:24} And Jacob was left alone; and there wrestled a man with him
until the breaking of the day. {32:25} And when he saw that he
prevailed not against him, he touched the hollow of his thigh; and the
hollow of Jacob's thigh was out of joint, as he wrestled with him.
{32:26} And he said, Let me go, for the day breaketh. And he said, I
will not let thee go, except thou bless me. {32:27} And he said unto
him, What [is] thy name? And he said, Jacob. {32:28} And he said, Thy
name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast
thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed. {32:29} And Jacob
asked [him,] and said, Tell [me,] I pray thee, thy name. And he said,
Wherefore [is] it [that] thou dost ask after my name? And he blessed
him there. {32:30} And Jacob called the name of the place Peniel: for I
have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved. {32:31} And as he
passed over Penuel the sun rose upon him, and he halted upon his thigh.
{32:32} Therefore the children of Israel eat not [of] the sinew which
shrank, which [is] upon the hollow of the thigh, unto this day: because
he touched the hollow of Jacob's thigh in the sinew that shrank.

   {33:1} And Jacob lifted up his eyes, and looked, and, behold, Esau
came, and with him four hundred men. And he divided the children unto
Leah, and unto Rachel, and unto the two handmaids. {33:2} And he put
the handmaids and their children foremost, and Leah and her children
after, and Rachel and Joseph hindermost. {33:3} And he passed over
before them, and bowed himself to the ground seven times, until he came
near to his brother. {33:4} And Esau ran to meet him, and embraced him,
and fell on his neck, and kissed him: and they wept. {33:5} And he
lifted up his eyes, and saw the women and the children; and said, Who
[are] those with thee? And he said, The children which God hath
graciously given thy servant. {33:6} Then the handmaidens came near,
they and their children, and they bowed themselves. {33:7} And Leah
also with her children came near, and bowed themselves: and after came
Joseph near and Rachel, and they bowed themselves. {33:8} And he said,
What [meanest] thou by all this drove which I met? And he said, [These
are] to find grace in the sight of my lord. {33:9} And Esau said, I
have enough, my brother; keep that thou hast unto thyself. {33:10} And
Jacob said, Nay, I pray thee, if now I have found grace in thy sight,
then receive my present at my hand: for therefore I have seen thy face,
as though I had seen the face of God, and thou wast pleased with me.
{33:11} Take, I pray thee, my blessing that is brought to thee; because
God hath dealt graciously with me, and because I have enough. And he
urged him, and he took [it. ]{33:12} And he said, Let us take our
journey, and let us go, and I will go before thee. {33:13} And he said
unto him, My lord knoweth that the children [are] tender, and the
flocks and herds with young [are] with me: and if men should overdrive
them one day, all the flock will die. {33:14} Let my lord, I pray thee,
pass over before his servant: and I will lead on softly, according as
the cattle that goeth before me and the children be able to endure,
until I come unto my lord unto Seir. {33:15} And Esau said, Let me now
leave with thee [some] of the folk that [are] with me. And he said,
What needeth it? let me find grace in the sight of my lord.

   {33:16} So Esau returned that day on his way unto Seir. {33:17} And
Jacob journeyed to Succoth, and built him an house, and made booths for
his cattle: therefore the name of the place is called Succoth.

   {33:18} And Jacob came to Shalem, a city of Shechem, which [is] in
the land of Canaan, when he came from Padan-aram; and pitched his tent
before the city. {33:19} And he bought a parcel of a field, where he
had spread his tent, at the hand of the children of Hamor, Shechem's
father, for an hundred pieces of money. {33:20} And he erected there an
altar, and called it El-elohe-Israel.

   {34:1} And Dinah the daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob,
went out to see the daughters of the land. {34:2} And when Shechem the
son of Hamor the Hivite, prince of the country, saw her, he took her,
and lay with her, and defiled her. {34:3} And his soul clave unto Dinah
the daughter of Jacob, and he loved the damsel, and spake kindly unto
the damsel. {34:4} And Shechem spake unto his father Hamor, saying, Get
me this damsel to wife. {34:5} And Jacob heard that he had defiled
Dinah his daughter: now his sons were with his cattle in the field: and
Jacob held his peace until they were come.

   {34:6} And Hamor the father of Shechem went out unto Jacob to
commune with him. {34:7} And the sons of Jacob came out of the field
when they heard [it:] and the men were grieved, and they were very
wroth, because he had wrought folly in Israel in lying with Jacob's
daughter; which thing ought not to be done. {34:8} And Hamor communed
with them, saying, The soul of my son Shechem longeth for your
daughter: I pray you give her him to wife. {34:9} And make ye marriages
with us, [and] give your daughters unto us, and take our daughters unto
you. {34:10} And ye shall dwell with us: and the land shall be before
you; dwell and trade ye therein, and get you possessions therein.
{34:11} And Shechem said unto her father and unto her brethren, Let me
find grace in your eyes, and what ye shall say unto me I will give.
{34:12} Ask me never so much dowry and gift, and I will give according
as ye shall say unto me: but give me the damsel to wife. {34:13} And
the sons of Jacob answered Shechem and Hamor his father deceitfully,
and said, because he had defiled Dinah their sister: {34:14} And they
said unto them, We cannot do this thing, to give our sister to one that
is uncircumcised; for that [were] a reproach unto us: {34:15} But in
this will we consent unto you: If ye will be as we [be,] that every
male of you be circumcised; {34:16} Then will we give our daughters
unto you, and we will take your daughters to us, and we will dwell with
you, and we will become one people. {34:17} But if ye will not hearken
unto us, to be circumcised; then will we take our daughter, and we will
be gone. {34:18} And their words pleased Hamor, and Shechem Hamor's
son. {34:19} And the young man deferred not to do the thing, because he
had delight in Jacob's daughter: and he [was] more honourable than all
the house of his father.

   {34:20} And Hamor and Shechem his son came unto the gate of their
city, and communed with the men of their city, saying, {34:21} These
men [are] peaceable with us; therefore let them dwell in the land, and
trade therein; for the land, behold, [it is] large enough for them; let
us take their daughters to us for wives, and let us give them our
daughters. {34:22} Only herein will the men consent unto us for to
dwell with us, to be one people, if every male among us be circumcised,
as they [are] circumcised. {34:23} [Shall] not their cattle and their
substance and every beast of theirs [be] ours? only let us consent unto
them, and they will dwell with us. {34:24} And unto Hamor and unto
Shechem his son hearkened all that went out of the gate of his city;
and every male was circumcised, all that went out of the gate of his
city.

   {34:25} And it came to pass on the third day, when they were sore,
that two of the sons of Jacob, Simeon and Levi, Dinah's brethren, took
each man his sword, and came upon the city boldly, and slew all the
males. {34:26} And they slew Hamor and Shechem his son with the edge of
the sword, and took Dinah out of Shechem's house, and went out. {34:27}
The sons of Jacob came upon the slain, and spoiled the city, because
they had defiled their sister. {34:28} They took their sheep, and their
oxen, and their asses, and that which [was] in the city, and that which
[was] in the field, {34:29} And all their wealth, and all their little
ones, and their wives took they captive, and spoiled even all that
[was] in the house. {34:30} And Jacob said to Simeon and Levi, Ye have
troubled me to make me to stink among the inhabitants of the land,
among the Canaanites and the Perizzites: and I [being] few in number,
they shall gather themselves together against me, and slay me; and I
shall be destroyed, I and my house. {34:31} And they said, Should he
deal with our sister as with an harlot?

   {35:1} And God said unto Jacob, Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell
there: and make there an altar unto God, that appeared unto thee when
thou fleddest from the face of Esau thy brother. {35:2} Then Jacob said
unto his household, and to all that [were] with him, Put away the
strange gods that [are] among you, and be clean, and change your
garments: {35:3} And let us arise, and go up to Bethel; and I will make
there an altar unto God, who answered me in the day of my distress, and
was with me in the way which I went. {35:4} And they gave unto Jacob
all the strange gods which [were] in their hand, and [all their]
earrings which [were] in their ears; and Jacob hid them under the oak
which [was] by Shechem. {35:5} And they journeyed: and the terror of
God was upon the cities that [were] round about them, and they did not
pursue after the sons of Jacob.

   {35:6} So Jacob came to Luz, which [is] in the land of Canaan, that
[is,] Bethel, he and all the people that [were] with him. {35:7} And he
built there an altar, and called the place El-beth-el: because there
God appeared unto him, when he fled from the face of his brother.
{35:8} But Deborah Rebekah's nurse died, and she was buried beneath
Bethel under an oak: and the name of it was called Allon-bachuth.

   {35:9} And God appeared unto Jacob again, when he came out of
Padan-aram, and blessed him. {35:10} And God said unto him, Thy name
[is] Jacob: thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel
shall be thy name: and he called his name Israel. {35:11} And God said
unto him, I [am] God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a
company of nations shall be of thee, and kings shall come out of thy
loins; {35:12} And the land which I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee I
will give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land. {35:13}
And God went up from him in the place where he talked with him. {35:14}
And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he talked with him, [even]
a pillar of stone: and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he
poured oil thereon. {35:15} And Jacob called the name of the place
where God spake with him, Bethel.

   {35:16} And they journeyed from Bethel; and there was but a little
way to come to Ephrath: and Rachel travailed, and she had hard labour.
{35:17} And it came to pass, when she was in hard labour, that the
midwife said unto her, Fear not; thou shalt have this son also. {35:18}
And it came to pass, as her soul was in departing, (for she died) that
she called his name Ben-oni: but his father called him Benjamin.
{35:19} And Rachel died, and was buried in the way to Ephrath, which
[is] Bethlehem. {35:20} And Jacob set a pillar upon her grave: that
[is] the pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day.

   {35:21} And Israel journeyed, and spread his tent beyond the tower
of Edar. {35:22} And it came to pass, when Israel dwelt in that land,
that Reuben went and lay with Bilhah his father's concubine: and Israel
heard [it.] Now the sons of Jacob were twelve: {35:23} The sons of
Leah; Reuben, Jacob's firstborn, and Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and
Issachar, and Zebulun: {35:24} The sons of Rachel; Joseph, and
Benjamin: {35:25} And the sons of Bilhah, Rachel's handmaid; Dan, and
Naphtali: {35:26} And the sons of Zilpah, Leah's handmaid; Gad, and
Asher: these [are] the sons of Jacob, which were born to him in
Padan-aram.

   {35:27} And Jacob came unto Isaac his father unto Mamre, unto the
city of Arbah, which [is] Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac sojourned.
{35:28} And the days of Isaac were an hundred and fourscore years.
{35:29} And Isaac gave up the ghost, and died, and was gathered unto
his people, [being] old and full of days: and his sons Esau and Jacob
buried him.

   {36:1} Now these [are] the generations of Esau, who [is] Edom.
{36:2} Esau took his wives of the daughters of Canaan; Adah the
daughter of Elon the Hittite, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah the
daughter of Zibeon the Hivite; {36:3} And Bashemath Ishmael's daughter,
sister of Nebajoth. {36:4} And Adah bare to Esau Eliphaz; and Bashemath
bare Reuel; {36:5} And Aholibamah bare Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah:
these [are] the sons of Esau, which were born unto him in the land of
Canaan. {36:6} And Esau took his wives, and his sons, and his
daughters, and all the persons of his house, and his cattle, and all
his beasts, and all his substance, which he had got in the land of
Canaan; and went into the country from the face of his brother Jacob.
{36:7} For their riches were more than that they might dwell together;
and the land wherein they were strangers could not bear them because of
their cattle. {36:8} Thus dwelt Esau in mount Seir: Esau [is] Edom.

   {36:9} And these [are] the generations of Esau the father of the
Edomites in mount Seir: {36:10} These [are] the names of Esau's sons;
Eliphaz the son of Adah the wife of Esau, Reuel the son of Bashemath
the wife of Esau. {36:11} And the sons of Eliphaz were Teman, Omar,
Zepho, and Gatam, and Kenaz. {36:12} And Timna was concubine to Eliphaz
Esau's son; and she bare to Eliphaz Amalek: these [were] the sons of
Adah Esau's wife. {36:13} And these [are] the sons of Reuel; Nahath,
and Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah: these were the sons of Bashemath Esau's
wife.

   {36:14} And these were the sons of Aholibamah, the daughter of Anah
the daughter of Zibeon, Esau's wife: and she bare to Esau Jeush, and
Jaalam, and Korah.

   {36:15} These [were] dukes of the sons of Esau: the sons of Eliphaz
the firstborn [son] of Esau; duke Teman, duke Omar, duke Zepho, duke
Kenaz, {36:16} Duke Korah, duke Gatam, [and] duke Amalek: these [are]
the dukes [that came] of Eliphaz in the land of Edom; these [were] the
sons of Adah.

   {36:17} And these [are] the sons of Reuel Esau's son; duke Nahath,
duke Zerah, duke Shammah, duke Mizzah: these [are] the dukes [that
came] of Reuel in the land of Edom; these [are] the sons of Bashemath
Esau's wife.

   {36:18} And these [are] the sons of Aholibamah Esau's wife; duke
Jeush, duke Jaalam, duke Korah: these [were] the dukes [that came] of
Aholibamah the daughter of Anah, Esau's wife. {36:19} These [are] the
sons of Esau, who [is] Edom, and these [are] their dukes.

   {36:20} These [are] the sons of Seir the Horite, who inhabited the
land; Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, {36:21} And Dishon, and
Ezer, and Dishan: these [are] the dukes of the Horites, the children of
Seir in the land of Edom. {36:22} And the children of Lotan were Hori
and Hemam; and Lotan's sister [was] Timna. {36:23} And the children of
Shobal [were] these; Alvan, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shepho, and Onam.
{36:24} And these [are] the children of Zibeon; both Ajah, and Anah:
this [was that] Anah that found the mules in the wilderness, as he fed
the asses of Zibeon his father. {36:25} And the children of Anah [were]
these; Dishon, and Aholibamah the daughter of Anah. {36:26} And these
[are] the children of Dishon; Hemdan, and Eshban, and Ithran, and
Cheran. {36:27} The children of Ezer [are] these; Bilhan, and Zaavan,
and Akan. {36:28} The children of Dishan [are] these: Uz, and Aran.
{36:29} These [are] the dukes [that came] of the Horites; duke Lotan,
duke Shobal, duke Zibeon, duke Anah, {36:30} Duke Dishon, duke Ezer,
duke Dishan: these [are] the dukes [that came] of Hori, among their
dukes in the land of Seir.

   {36:31} And these [are] the kings that reigned in the land of Edom,
before there reigned any king over the children of Israel. {36:32} And
Bela the son of Beor reigned in Edom: and the name of his city [was]
Dinhabah. {36:33} And Bela died, and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah
reigned in his stead. {36:34} And Jobab died, and Husham of the land of
Temani reigned in his stead. {36:35} And Husham died, and Hadad the son
of Bedad, who smote Midian in the field of Moab, reigned in his stead:
and the name of his city [was] Avith. {36:36} And Hadad died, and
Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead. {36:37} And Samlah died, and
Saul of Rehoboth [by] the river reigned in his stead. {36:38} And Saul
died, and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead. {36:39}
And Baal-hanan the son of Achbor died, and Hadar reigned in his stead:
and the name of his city [was] Pau; and his wife's name [was]
Mehetabel, the daughter of Matred, the daughter of Mezahab. {36:40} And
these [are] the names of the dukes [that came] of Esau, according to
their families, after their places, by their names; duke Timnah, duke
Alvah, duke Jetheth, {36:41} Duke Aholibamah, duke Elah, duke Pinon,
{36:42} Duke Kenaz, duke Teman, duke Mibzar, {36:43} Duke Magdiel, duke
Iram: these [be] the dukes of Edom, according to their habitations in
the land of their possession: he [is] Esau the father of the Edomites.

   {37:1} And Jacob dwelt in the land wherein his father was a
stranger, in the land of Canaan. {37:2} These [are] the generations of
Jacob. Joseph, [being] seventeen years old, was feeding the flock with
his brethren; and the lad [was] with the sons of Bilhah, and with the
sons of Zilpah, his father's wives: and Joseph brought unto his father
their evil report. {37:3} Now Israel loved Joseph more than all his
children, because he [was] the son of his old age: and he made him a
coat of [many] colours. {37:4} And when his brethren saw that their
father loved him more than all his brethren, they hated him, and could
not speak peaceably unto him.

   {37:5} And Joseph dreamed a dream, and he told [it] his brethren:
and they hated him yet the more. {37:6} And he said unto them, Hear, I
pray you, this dream which I have dreamed: {37:7} For, behold, we
[were] binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also
stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made
obeisance to my sheaf. {37:8} And his brethren said to him, Shalt thou
indeed reign over us? or shalt thou indeed have dominion over us? And
they hated him yet the more for his dreams, and for his words.

   {37:9} And he dreamed yet another dream, and told it his brethren,
and said, Behold, I have dreamed a dream more; and, behold, the sun and
the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me. {37:10} And he told
[it] to his father, and to his brethren: and his father rebuked him,
and said unto him, What [is] this dream that thou hast dreamed? Shall I
and thy mother and thy brethren indeed come to bow down ourselves to
thee to the earth? {37:11} And his brethren envied him; but his father
observed the saying.

   {37:12} And his brethren went to feed their father's flock in
Shechem. {37:13} And Israel said unto Joseph, Do not thy brethren feed
[the flock] in Shechem? come, and I will send thee unto them. And he
said to him, Here [am] I. {37:14} And he said to him, Go, I pray thee,
see whether it be well with thy brethren, and well with the flocks; and
bring me word again. So he sent him out of the vale of Hebron, and he
came to Shechem.

   {37:15} And a certain man found him, and, behold, [he was] wandering
in the field: and the man asked him, saying, What seekest thou? {37:16}
And he said, I seek my brethren: tell me, I pray thee, where they feed
[their flocks. ]{37:17} And the man said, They are departed hence; for
I heard them say, Let us go to Dothan. And Joseph went after his
brethren, and found them in Dothan. {37:18} And when they saw him afar
off, even before he came near unto them, they conspired against him to
slay him. {37:19} And they said one to another, Behold, this dreamer
cometh. {37:20} Come now therefore, and let us slay him, and cast him
into some pit, and we will say, Some evil beast hath devoured him: and
we shall see what will become of his dreams. {37:21} And Reuben heard
[it,] and he delivered him out of their hands; and said, Let us not
kill him. {37:22} And Reuben said unto them, Shed no blood, [but] cast
him into this pit that is in the wilderness, and lay no hand upon him;
that he might rid him out of their hands, to deliver him to his father
again.

   {37:23} And it came to pass, when Joseph was come unto his brethren,
that they stript Joseph out of his coat, [his] coat of [many] colours
that [was] on him; {37:24} And they took him, and cast him into a pit:
and the pit [was] empty, [there was] no water in it. {37:25} And they
sat down to eat bread: and they lifted up their eyes and looked, and,
behold, a company of Ishmeelites came from Gilead with their camels
bearing spicery and balm and myrrh, going to carry [it] down to Egypt.
{37:26} And Judah said unto his brethren, What profit [is it] if we
slay our brother, and conceal his blood? {37:27} Come, and let us sell
him to the Ishmeelites, and let not our hand be upon him; for he [is]
our brother [and] our flesh. And his brethren were content. {37:28}
Then there passed by Midianites merchantmen; and they drew and lifted
up Joseph out of the pit, and sold Joseph to the Ishmeelites for twenty
[pieces] of silver: and they brought Joseph into Egypt.

   {37:29} And Reuben returned unto the pit; and, behold, Joseph [was]
not in the pit; and he rent his clothes. {37:30} And he returned unto
his brethren, and said, The child [is] not; and I, whither shall I go?
{37:31} And they took Joseph's coat, and killed a kid of the goats, and
dipped the coat in the blood; {37:32} And they sent the coat of [many]
colours, and they brought [it] to their father; and said, This have we
found: know now whether it [be] thy son's coat or no. {37:33} And he
knew it, and said, [It is] my son's coat; an evil beast hath devoured
him; Joseph is without doubt rent in pieces. {37:34} And Jacob rent his
clothes, and put sackcloth upon his loins, and mourned for his son many
days. {37:35} And all his sons and all his daughters rose up to comfort
him; but he refused to be comforted; and he said, For I will go down
into the grave unto my son mourning. Thus his father wept for him.
{37:36} And the Midianites sold him into Egypt unto Potiphar, an
officer of Pharaoh's, [and] captain of the guard.

   {38:1} And it came to pass at that time, that Judah went down from
his brethren, and turned in to a certain Adullamite, whose name [was]
Hirah. {38:2} And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite,
whose name [was] Shuah; and he took her, and went in unto her. {38:3}
And she conceived, and bare a son; and he called his name Er. {38:4}
And she conceived again, and bare a son; and she called his name Onan.
{38:5} And she yet again conceived, and bare a son; and called his name
Shelah: and he was at Chezib, when she bare him. {38:6} And Judah took
a wife for Er his firstborn, whose name [was] Tamar. {38:7} And Er,
Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the LORD; and the LORD
slew him. {38:8} And Judah said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother's
wife, and marry her, and raise up seed to thy brother. {38:9} And Onan
knew that the seed should not be his; and it came to pass, when he went
in unto his brother's wife, that he spilled [it] on the ground, lest
that he should give seed to his brother. {38:10} And the thing which he
did displeased the LORD: wherefore he slew him also. {38:11} Then said
Judah to Tamar his daughter in law, Remain a widow at thy father's
house, till Shelah my son be grown: for he said, Lest peradventure he
die also, as his brethren [did.] And Tamar went and dwelt in her
father's house.

   {38:12} And in process of time the daughter of Shuah Judah's wife
died; and Judah was comforted, and went up unto his sheepshearers to
Timnath, he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite. {38:13} And it was
told Tamar, saying, Behold thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to
shear his sheep. {38:14} And she put her widow's garments off from her,
and covered her with a vail, and wrapped herself, and sat in an open
place, which [is] by the way to Timnath; for she saw that Shelah was
grown, and she was not given unto him to wife. {38:15} When Judah saw
her, he thought her [to be] an harlot; because she had covered her
face. {38:16} And he turned unto her by the way, and said, Go to, I
pray thee, let me come in unto thee; (for he knew not that she [was]
his daughter in law.) And she said, What wilt thou give me, that thou
mayest come in unto me? {38:17} And he said, I will send [thee] a kid
from the flock. And she said, Wilt thou give [me] a pledge, till thou
send [it? ]{38:18} And he said, What pledge shall I give thee? And she
said, Thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that [is] in thine
hand. And he gave [it] her, and came in unto her, and she conceived by
him. {38:19} And she arose, and went away, and laid by her vail from
her, and put on the garments of her widowhood. {38:20} And Judah sent
the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite, to receive [his]
pledge from the woman's hand: but he found her not. {38:21} Then he
asked the men of that place, saying, Where [is] the harlot, that [was]
openly by the way side? And they said, There was no harlot in this
[place. ]{38:22} And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her;
and also the men of the place said, [that] there was no harlot in this
[place. ]{38:23} And Judah said, Let her take [it] to her, lest we be
shamed: behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her.

   {38:24} And it came to pass about three months after, that it was
told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played the harlot;
and also, behold, she [is] with child by whoredom. And Judah said,
Bring her forth, and let her be burnt. {38:25} When she [was] brought
forth, she sent to her father in law, saying, By the man, whose these
[are, am] I with child: and she said, Discern, I pray thee, whose [are]
these, the signet, and bracelets, and staff. {38:26} And Judah
acknowledged [them,] and said, She hath been more righteous than I;
because that I gave her not to Shelah my son. And he knew her again no
more.

   {38:27} And it came to pass in the time of her travail, that,
behold, twins [were] in her womb. {38:28} And it came to pass, when she
travailed, that [the one] put out [his] hand: and the midwife took and
bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying, This came out first,
{38:29} And it came to pass, as he drew back his hand, that, behold,
his brother came out: and she said, How hast thou broken forth? [this]
breach [be] upon thee: therefore his name was called Pharez. {38:30}
And afterward came out his brother, that had the scarlet thread upon
his hand: and his name was called Zarah.

   {39:1} And Joseph was brought down to Egypt; and Potiphar, an
officer of Pharaoh, captain of the guard, an Egyptian, bought him of
the hands of the Ishmeelites, which had brought him down thither.
{39:2} And the LORD was with Joseph, and he was a prosperous man; and
he was in the house of his master the Egyptian. {39:3} And his master
saw that the LORD [was] with him, and that the LORD made all [that] he
did to prosper in his hand. {39:4} And Joseph found grace in his sight,
and he served him: and he made him overseer over his house, and all
that he had he put into his hand. {39:5} And it came to pass from the
time [that] he had made him overseer in his house, and over all that he
had, that the LORD blessed the Egyptian's house for Joseph's sake; and
the blessing of the LORD was upon all that he had in the house, and in
the field. {39:6} And he left all that he had in Joseph's hand; and he
knew not ought he had, save the bread which he did eat. And Joseph was
[a] goodly [person,] and well favoured.

   {39:7} And it came to pass after these things, that his master's
wife cast her eyes upon Joseph; and she said, Lie with me. {39:8} But
he refused, and said unto his master's wife, Behold, my master wotteth
not what [is] with me in the house, and he hath committed all that he
hath to my hand; {39:9} [There is] none greater in this house than I;
neither hath he kept back any thing from me but thee, because thou
[art] his wife: how then can I do this great wickedness, and sin
against God? {39:10} And it came to pass, as she spake to Joseph day by
day, that he hearkened not unto her, to lie by her, [or] to be with
her. {39:11} And it came to pass about this time, that [Joseph] went
into the house to do his business; and [there was] none of the men of
the house there within. {39:12} And she caught him by his garment,
saying, Lie with me: and he left his garment in her hand, and fled, and
got him out. {39:13} And it came to pass, when she saw that he had left
his garment in her hand, and was fled forth, {39:14} That she called
unto the men of her house, and spake unto them, saying, See, he hath
brought in an Hebrew unto us to mock us; he came in unto me to lie with
me, and I cried with a loud voice: {39:15} And it came to pass, when he
heard that I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment
with me, and fled, and got him out. {39:16} And she laid up his garment
by her, until his lord came home. {39:17} And she spake unto him
according to these words, saying, The Hebrew servant, which thou hast
brought unto us, came in unto me to mock me: {39:18} And it came to
pass, as I lifted up my voice and cried, that he left his garment with
me, and fled out. {39:19} And it came to pass, when his master heard
the words of his wife, which she spake unto him, saying, After this
manner did thy servant to me; that his wrath was kindled. {39:20} And
Joseph's master took him, and put him into the prison, a place where
the king's prisoners [were] bound: and he was there in the prison.

   {39:21} But the LORD was with Joseph, and shewed him mercy, and gave
him favour in the sight of the keeper of the prison. {39:22} And the
keeper of the prison committed to Joseph's hand all the prisoners that
[were] in the prison; and whatsoever they did there, he was the doer
[of it. ]{39:23} The keeper of the prison looked not to any thing [that
was] under his hand; because the LORD was with him, and [that] which he
did, the LORD made [it] to prosper.

   {40:1} And it came to pass after these things, [that] the butler of
the king of Egypt and [his] baker had offended their lord the king of
Egypt. {40:2} And Pharaoh was wroth against two [of] his officers,
against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers.
{40:3} And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the
guard, into the prison, the place where Joseph [was] bound. {40:4} And
the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them, and he served them:
and they continued a season in ward.

   {40:5} And they dreamed a dream both of them, each man his dream in
one night, each man according to the interpretation of his dream, the
butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which [were] bound in the
prison. {40:6} And Joseph came in unto them in the morning, and looked
upon them, and, behold, they [were] sad. {40:7} And he asked Pharaoh's
officers that [were] with him in the ward of his lord's house, saying,
Wherefore look ye [so] sadly to day? {40:8} And they said unto him, We
have dreamed a dream, and [there is] no interpreter of it. And Joseph
said unto them, [Do] not interpretations [belong] to God? tell me
[them,] I pray you. {40:9} And the chief butler told his dream to
Joseph, and said to him, In my dream, behold, a vine [was] before me;
{40:10} And in the vine [were] three branches: and it [was] as though
it budded, [and] her blossoms shot forth; and the clusters thereof
brought forth ripe grapes: {40:11} And Pharaoh's cup [was] in my hand:
and I took the grapes, and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup, and I gave
the cup into Pharaoh's hand. {40:12} And Joseph said unto him, This
[is] the interpretation of it: The three branches [are] three days:
{40:13} Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head, and
restore thee unto thy place: and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into
his hand, after the former manner when thou wast his butler. {40:14}
But think on me when it shall be well with thee, and shew kindness, I
pray thee, unto me, and make mention of me unto Pharaoh, and bring me
out of this house: {40:15} For indeed I was stolen away out of the land
of the Hebrews: and here also have I done nothing that they should put
me into the dungeon. {40:16} When the chief baker saw that the
interpretation was good, he said unto Joseph, I also [was] in my dream,
and, behold, [I had] three white baskets on my head: {40:17} And in the
uppermost basket [there was] of all manner of bakemeats for Pharaoh;
and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head. {40:18} And
Joseph answered and said, This [is] the interpretation thereof: The
three baskets [are] three days: {40:19} Yet within three days shall
Pharaoh lift up thy head from off thee, and shall hang thee on a tree;
and the birds shall eat thy flesh from off thee.

   {40:20} And it came to pass the third day, [which was] Pharaoh's
birthday, that he made a feast unto all his servants: and he lifted up
the head of the chief butler and of the chief baker among his servants.
{40:21} And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again; and
he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand: {40:22} But he hanged the chief
baker: as Joseph had interpreted to them. {40:23} Yet did not the chief
butler remember Joseph, but forgat him.

   {41:1} And it came to pass at the end of two full years, that
Pharaoh dreamed: and, behold, he stood by the river. {41:2} And,
behold, there came up out of the river seven well favoured kine and
fatfleshed; and they fed in a meadow. {41:3} And, behold, seven other
kine came up after them out of the river, ill favoured and leanfleshed;
and stood by the [other] kine upon the brink of the river. {41:4} And
the ill favoured and leanfleshed kine did eat up the seven well
favoured and fat kine. So Pharaoh awoke. {41:5} And he slept and
dreamed the second time: and, behold, seven ears of corn came up upon
one stalk, rank and good. {41:6} And, behold, seven thin ears and
blasted with the east wind sprung up after them. {41:7} And the seven
thin ears devoured the seven rank and full ears. And Pharaoh awoke,
and, behold, [it was] a dream. {41:8} And it came to pass in the
morning that his spirit was troubled; and he sent and called for all
the magicians of Egypt, and all the wise men thereof: and Pharaoh told
them his dream; but [there was] none that could interpret them unto
Pharaoh.

   {41:9} Then spake the chief butler unto Pharaoh, saying, I do
remember my faults this day: {41:10} Pharaoh was wroth with his
servants, and put me in ward in the captain of the guard's house, both
[me] and the chief baker: {41:11} And we dreamed a dream in one night,
I and he; we dreamed each man according to the interpretation of his
dream. {41:12} And [there was] there with us a young man, an Hebrew,
servant to the captain of the guard; and we told him, and he
interpreted to us our dreams; to each man according to his dream he did
interpret. {41:13} And it came to pass, as he interpreted to us, so it
was; me he restored unto mine office, and him he hanged.

   {41:14} Then Pharaoh sent and called Joseph, and they brought him
hastily out of the dungeon: and he shaved [himself,] and changed his
raiment, and came in unto Pharaoh. {41:15} And Pharaoh said unto
Joseph, I have dreamed a dream, and [there is] none that can interpret
it: and I have heard say of thee, [that] thou canst understand a dream
to interpret it. {41:16} And Joseph answered Pharaoh, saying, [It is]
not in me: God shall give Pharaoh an answer of peace. {41:17} And
Pharaoh said unto Joseph, In my dream, behold, I stood upon the bank of
the river: {41:18} And, behold, there came up out of the river seven
kine, fatfleshed and well favoured; and they fed in a meadow: {41:19}
And, behold, seven other kine came up after them, poor and very ill
favoured and leanfleshed, such as I never saw in all the land of Egypt
for badness: {41:20} And the lean and the ill favoured kine did eat up
the first seven fat kine: {41:21} And when they had eaten them up, it
could not be known that they had eaten them; but they [were] still ill
favoured, as at the beginning. So I awoke. {41:22} And I saw in my
dream, and, behold, seven ears came up in one stalk, full and good:
{41:23} And, behold, seven ears, withered, thin, [and] blasted with the
east wind, sprung up after them: {41:24} And the thin ears devoured the
seven good ears: and I told [this] unto the magicians; but [there was]
none that could declare [it] to me.

   {41:25} And Joseph said unto Pharaoh, The dream of Pharaoh [is] one:
God hath shewed Pharaoh what he [is] about to do. {41:26} The seven
good kine [are] seven years; and the seven good ears [are] seven years:
the dream [is] one. {41:27} And the seven thin and ill favoured kine
that came up after them [are] seven years; and the seven empty ears
blasted with the east wind shall be seven years of famine. {41:28} This
[is] the thing which I have spoken unto Pharaoh: What God [is] about to
do he sheweth unto Pharaoh. {41:29} Behold, there come seven years of
great plenty throughout all the land of Egypt: {41:30} And there shall
arise after them seven years of famine; and all the plenty shall be
forgotten in the land of Egypt; and the famine shall consume the land;
{41:31} And the plenty shall not be known in the land by reason of that
famine following; for it [shall be] very grievous. {41:32} And for that
the dream was doubled unto Pharaoh twice; [it is] because the thing
[is] established by God, and God will shortly bring it to pass. {41:33}
Now therefore let Pharaoh look out a man discreet and wise, and set him
over the land of Egypt. {41:34} Let Pharaoh do [this,] and let him
appoint officers over the land, and take up the fifth part of the land
of Egypt in the seven plenteous years. {41:35} And let them gather all
the food of those good years that come, and lay up corn under the hand
of Pharaoh, and let them keep food in the cities. {41:36} And that food
shall be for store to the land against the seven years of famine, which
shall be in the land of Egypt; that the land perish not through the
famine.

   {41:37} And the thing was good in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the
eyes of all his servants. {41:38} And Pharaoh said unto his servants,
Can we find [such a one] as this [is,] a man in whom the Spirit of God
is? {41:39} And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Forasmuch as God hath shewed
thee all this, [there is] none so discreet and wise as thou [art:
]{41:40} Thou shalt be over my house, and according unto thy word shall
all my people be ruled: only in the throne will I be greater than thou.
{41:41} And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, See, I have set thee over all the
land of Egypt. {41:42} And Pharaoh took off his ring from his hand, and
put it upon Joseph's hand, and arrayed him in vestures of fine linen,
and put a gold chain about his neck; {41:43} And he made him to ride in
the second chariot which he had; and they cried before him, Bow the
knee: and he made him [ruler] over all the land of Egypt. {41:44} And
Pharaoh said unto Joseph, I [am] Pharaoh, and without thee shall no man
lift up his hand or foot in all the land of Egypt. {41:45} And Pharaoh
called Joseph's name Zaphnath-paaneah; and he gave him to wife Asenath
the daughter of Poti- pherah priest of On. And Joseph went out over
[all] the land of Egypt.

   {41:46} And Joseph [was] thirty years old when he stood before
Pharaoh king of Egypt. And Joseph went out from the presence of
Pharaoh, and went throughout all the land of Egypt. {41:47} And in the
seven plenteous years the earth brought forth by handfuls. {41:48} And
he gathered up all the food of the seven years, which were in the land
of Egypt, and laid up the food in the cities: the food of the field,
which [was] round about every city, laid he up in the same. {41:49} And
Joseph gathered corn as the sand of the sea, very much, until he left
numbering; for [it was] without number. {41:50} And unto Joseph were
born two sons before the years of famine came, which Asenath the
daughter of Poti- pherah priest of On bare unto him. {41:51} And Joseph
called the name of the firstborn Manasseh: For God, [said he,] hath
made me forget all my toil, and all my father's house. {41:52} And the
name of the second called he Ephraim: For God hath caused me to be
fruitful in the land of my affliction.

   {41:53} And the seven years of plenteousness, that was in the land
of Egypt, were ended. {41:54} And the seven years of dearth began to
come, according as Joseph had said: and the dearth was in all lands;
but in all the land of Egypt there was bread. {41:55} And when all the
land of Egypt was famished, the people cried to Pharaoh for bread: and
Pharaoh said unto all the Egyptians, Go unto Joseph; what he saith to
you, do. {41:56} And the famine was over all the face of the earth: and
Joseph opened all the storehouses, and sold unto the Egyptians; and the
famine waxed sore in the land of Egypt. {41:57} And all countries came
into Egypt to Joseph for to buy [corn;] because that the famine was so
sore in all lands.

   {42:1} Now when Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob said
unto his sons, Why do ye look one upon another? {42:2} And he said,
Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither,
and buy for us from thence; that we may live, and not die.

   {42:3} And Joseph's ten brethren went down to buy corn in Egypt.
{42:4} But Benjamin, Joseph's brother, Jacob sent not with his
brethren; for he said, Lest peradventure mischief befall him. {42:5}
And the sons of Israel came to buy [corn] among those that came: for
the famine was in the land of Canaan. {42:6} And Joseph [was] the
governor over the land, [and] he [it was] that sold to all the people
of the land: and Joseph's brethren came, and bowed down themselves
before him [with] their faces to the earth. {42:7} And Joseph saw his
brethren, and he knew them, but made himself strange unto them, and
spake roughly unto them; and he said unto them, Whence come ye? And
they said, From the land of Canaan to buy food. {42:8} And Joseph knew
his brethren, but they knew not him. {42:9} And Joseph remembered the
dreams which he dreamed of them, and said unto them, Ye [are] spies; to
see the nakedness of the land ye are come. {42:10} And they said unto
him, Nay, my lord, but to buy food are thy servants come. {42:11} We
[are] all one man's sons; we [are] true [men,] thy servants are no
spies. {42:12} And he said unto them, Nay, but to see the nakedness of
the land ye are come. {42:13} And they said, Thy servants [are] twelve
brethren, the sons of one man in the land of Canaan; and, behold, the
youngest [is] this day with our father, and one [is] not. {42:14} And
Joseph said unto them, That [is it] that I spake unto you, saying, Ye
[are] spies: {42:15} Hereby ye shall be proved: By the life of Pharaoh
ye shall not go forth hence, except your youngest brother come hither.
{42:16} Send one of you, and let him fetch your brother, and ye shall
be kept in prison, that your words may be proved, whether [there be
any] truth in you: or else by the life of Pharaoh surely ye [are]
spies. {42:17} And he put them all together into ward three days.
{42:18} And Joseph said unto them the third day, This do, and live;
[for] I fear God: {42:19} If ye [be] true [men,] let one of your
brethren be bound in the house of your prison: go ye, carry corn for
the famine of your houses: {42:20} But bring your youngest brother unto
me; so shall your words be verified, and ye shall not die. And they did
so.

   {42:21} And they said one to another, We [are] verily guilty
concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his soul, when he
besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is this distress come
upon us. {42:22} And Reuben answered them, saying, Spake I not unto
you, saying, Do not sin against the child; and ye would not hear?
therefore, behold, also his blood is required. {42:23} And they knew
not that Joseph understood [them;] for he spake unto them by an
interpreter. {42:24} And he turned himself about from them, and wept;
and returned to them again, and communed with them, and took from them
Simeon, and bound him before their eyes.

   {42:25} Then Joseph commanded to fill their sacks with corn, and to
restore every man's money into his sack, and to give them provision for
the way: and thus did he unto them. {42:26} And they laded their asses
with the corn, and departed thence. {42:27} And as one of them opened
his sack to give his ass provender in the inn, he espied his money;
for, behold, it [was] in his sack's mouth. {42:28} And he said unto his
brethren, My money is restored; and, lo, [it is] even in my sack: and
their heart failed [them,] and they were afraid, saying one to another,
What [is] this [that] God hath done unto us?

   {42:29} And they came unto Jacob their father unto the land of
Canaan, and told him all that befell unto them; saying, {42:30} The
man, [who is] the lord of the land, spake roughly to us, and took us
for spies of the country. {42:31} And we said unto him, We [are] true
[men;] we are no spies: {42:32} We [be] twelve brethren, sons of our
father; one [is] not, and the youngest [is] this day with our father in
the land of Canaan. {42:33} And the man, the lord of the country, said
unto us, Hereby shall I know that ye [are] true [men;] leave one of
your brethren [here] with me, and take [food for] the famine of your
households, and be gone: {42:34} And bring your youngest brother unto
me: then shall I know that ye [are] no spies, but [that] ye [are] true
[men: so] will I deliver you your brother, and ye shall traffick in the
land.

   {42:35} And it came to pass as they emptied their sacks, that,
behold, every man's bundle of money [was] in his sack: and when [both]
they and their father saw the bundles of money, they were afraid.
{42:36} And Jacob their father said unto them, Me have ye bereaved [of
my children:] Joseph [is] not, and Simeon [is] not, and ye will take
Benjamin [away:] all these things are against me. {42:37} And Reuben
spake unto his father, saying, Slay my two sons, if I bring him not to
thee: deliver him into my hand, and I will bring him to thee again.
{42:38} And he said, My son shall not go down with you; for his brother
is dead, and he is left alone: if mischief befall him by the way in the
which ye go, then shall ye bring down my gray hairs with sorrow to the
grave.

   {43:1} And the famine [was] sore in the land. {43:2} And it came to
pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had brought out of
Egypt, their father said unto them, Go again, buy us a little food.
{43:3} And Judah spake unto him, saying, The man did solemnly protest
unto us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother [be]
with you. {43:4} If thou wilt send our brother with us, we will go down
and buy thee food: {43:5} But if thou wilt not send [him,] we will not
go down: for the man said unto us, Ye shall not see my face, except
your brother [be] with you. {43:6} And Israel said, Wherefore dealt ye
so ill with me, as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother? {43:7}
And they said, The man asked us straitly of our state, and of our
kindred, saying, [Is] your father yet alive? have ye [another] brother?
and we told him according to the tenor of these words: could we
certainly know that he would say, Bring your brother down? {43:8} And
Judah said unto Israel his father, Send the lad with me, and we will
arise and go; that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, [and]
also our little ones. {43:9} I will be surety for him; of my hand shalt
thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before
thee, then let me bear the blame for ever: {43:10} For except we had
lingered, surely now we had returned this second time. {43:11} And
their father Israel said unto them, If [it must be] so now, do this;
take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels, and carry down the
man a present, a little balm, and a little honey, spices, and myrrh,
nuts, and almonds: {43:12} And take double money in your hand; and the
money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry [it]
again in your hand; peradventure it [was] an oversight: {43:13} Take
also your brother, and arise, go again unto the man: {43:14} And God
Almighty give you mercy before the man, that he may send away your
other brother, and Benjamin. If I be bereaved [of my children,] I am
bereaved.

   {43:15} And the men took that present, and they took double money in
their hand, and Benjamin; and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and
stood before Joseph. {43:16} And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he
said to the ruler of his house, Bring [these] men home, and slay, and
make ready; for [these] men shall dine with me at noon. {43:17} And the
man did as Joseph bade; and the man brought the men into Joseph's
house. {43:18} And the men were afraid, because they were brought into
Joseph's house; and they said, Because of the money that was returned
in our sacks at the first time are we brought in; that he may seek
occasion against us, and fall upon us, and take us for bondmen, and our
asses. {43:19} And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house, and
they communed with him at the door of the house, {43:20} And said, O
sir, we came indeed down at the first time to buy food: {43:21} And it
came to pass, when we came to the inn, that we opened our sacks, and,
behold, [every] man's money [was] in the mouth of his sack, our money
in full weight: and we have brought it again in our hand. {43:22} And
other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food: we cannot
tell who put our money in our sacks. {43:23} And he said, Peace [be] to
you, fear not: your God, and the God of your father, hath given you
treasure in your sacks: I had your money. And he brought Simeon out
unto them. {43:24} And the man brought the men into Joseph's house, and
gave [them] water, and they washed their feet; and he gave their asses
provender. {43:25} And they made ready the present against Joseph came
at noon: for they heard that they should eat bread there.

   {43:26} And when Joseph came home, they brought him the present
which [was] in their hand into the house, and bowed themselves to him
to the earth. {43:27} And he asked them of [their] welfare, and said,
[Is] your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? [Is] he yet alive?
{43:28} And they answered, Thy servant our father [is] in good health,
he [is] yet alive. And they bowed down their heads, and made obeisance.
{43:29} And he lifted up his eyes, and saw his brother Benjamin, his
mother's son, and said, [Is] this your younger brother, of whom ye
spake unto me? And he said, God be gracious unto thee, my son. {43:30}
And Joseph made haste; for his bowels did yearn upon his brother: and
he sought [where] to weep; and he entered into [his] chamber, and wept
there. {43:31} And he washed his face, and went out, and refrained
himself, and said, Set on bread. {43:32} And they set on for him by
himself, and for them by themselves, and for the Egyptians, which did
eat with him, by themselves: because the Egyptians might not eat bread
with the Hebrews; for that [is] an abomination unto the Egyptians.
{43:33} And they sat before him, the firstborn according to his
birthright, and the youngest according to his youth: and the men
marvelled one at another. {43:34} And he took [and sent] messes unto
them from before him: but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any
of theirs. And they drank, and were merry with him.

   {44:1} And he commanded the steward of his house, saying, Fill the
men's sacks [with] food, as much as they can carry, and put every man's
money in his sack's mouth. {44:2} And put my cup, the silver cup, in
the sack's mouth of the youngest, and his corn money. And he did
according to the word that Joseph had spoken. {44:3} As soon as the
morning was light, the men were sent away, they and their asses. {44:4}
[And] when they were gone out of the city, [and] not [yet] far off,
Joseph said unto his steward, Up, follow after the men; and when thou
dost overtake them, say unto them, Wherefore have ye rewarded evil for
good? {44:5} [Is] not this [it] in which my lord drinketh, and whereby
indeed he divineth? ye have done evil in so doing.

   {44:6} And he overtook them, and he spake unto them these same
words. {44:7} And they said unto him, Wherefore saith my lord these
words? God forbid that thy servants should do according to this thing:
{44:8} Behold, the money, which we found in our sacks' mouths, we
brought again unto thee out of the land of Canaan: how then should we
steal out of thy lord's house silver or gold? {44:9} With whomsoever of
thy servants it be found, both let him die, and we also will be my
lord's bondmen. {44:10} And he said, Now also [let] it [be] according
unto your words; he with whom it is found shall be my servant; and ye
shall be blameless. {44:11} Then they speedily took down every man his
sack to the ground, and opened every man his sack. {44:12} And he
searched, [and] began at the eldest, and left at the youngest: and the
cup was found in Benjamin's sack. {44:13} Then they rent their clothes,
and laded every man his ass, and returned to the city.

   {44:14} And Judah and his brethren came to Joseph's house; for he
[was] yet there: and they fell before him on the ground. {44:15} And
Joseph said unto them, What deed [is] this that ye have done? wot ye
not that such a man as I can certainly divine? {44:16} And Judah said,
What shall we say unto my lord? what shall we speak? or how shall we
clear ourselves? God hath found out the iniquity of thy servants:
behold, we [are] my lord's servants, both we, and [he] also with whom
the cup is found. {44:17} And he said, God forbid that I should do so:
[but] the man in whose hand the cup is found, he shall be my servant;
and as for you, get you up in peace unto your father.

   {44:18} Then Judah came near unto him, and said, Oh my lord, let thy
servant, I pray thee, speak a word in my lord's ears, and let not thine
anger burn against thy servant: for thou [art] even as Pharaoh. {44:19}
My lord asked his servants, saying, Have ye a father, or a brother?
{44:20} And we said unto my lord, We have a father, an old man, and a
child of his old age, a little one; and his brother is dead, and he
alone is left of his mother, and his father loveth him. {44:21} And
thou saidst unto thy servants, Bring him down unto me, that I may set
mine eyes upon him. {44:22} And we said unto my lord, The lad cannot
leave his father: for [if] he should leave his father, [his father]
would die. {44:23} And thou saidst unto thy servants, Except your
youngest brother come down with you, ye shall see my face no more.
{44:24} And it came to pass when we came up unto thy servant my father,
we told him the words of my lord. {44:25} And our father said, Go
again, [and] buy us a little food. {44:26} And we said, We cannot go
down: if our youngest brother be with us, then will we go down: for we
may not see the man's face, except our youngest brother [be] with us.
{44:27} And thy servant my father said unto us, Ye know that my wife
bare me two [sons: ]{44:28} And the one went out from me, and I said,
Surely he is torn in pieces; and I saw him not since: {44:29} And if ye
take this also from me, and mischief befall him, ye shall bring down my
gray hairs with sorrow to the grave. {44:30} Now therefore when I come
to thy servant my father, and the lad [be] not with us; seeing that his
life is bound up in the lad's life; {44:31} It shall come to pass, when
he seeth that the lad [is] not [with us,] that he will die: and thy
servants shall bring down the gray hairs of thy servant our father with
sorrow to the grave. {44:32} For thy servant became surety for the lad
unto my father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear
the blame to my father for ever. {44:33} Now therefore, I pray thee,
let thy servant abide instead of the lad a bondman to my lord; and let
the lad go up with his brethren. {44:34} For how shall I go up to my
father, and the lad [be] not with me? lest peradventure I see the evil
that shall come on my father.

   {45:1} Then Joseph could not refrain himself before all them that
stood by him; and he cried, Cause every man to go out from me. And
there stood no man with him, while Joseph made himself known unto his
brethren. {45:2} And he wept aloud: and the Egyptians and the house of
Pharaoh heard. {45:3} And Joseph said unto his brethren, I [am] Joseph;
doth my father yet live? And his brethren could not answer him; for
they were troubled at his presence. {45:4} And Joseph said unto his
brethren, Come near to me, I pray you. And they came near. And he said,
I [am] Joseph your brother, whom ye sold into Egypt. {45:5} Now
therefore be not grieved, nor angry with yourselves, that ye sold me
hither: for God did send me before you to preserve life. {45:6} For
these two years [hath] the famine [been] in the land: and yet [there
are] five years, in the which [there shall] neither [be] earing nor
harvest. {45:7} And God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity
in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance. {45:8} So
now [it was] not you [that] sent me hither, but God: and he hath made
me a father to Pharaoh, and lord of all his house, and a ruler
throughout all the land of Egypt. {45:9} Haste ye, and go up to my
father, and say unto him, Thus saith thy son Joseph, God hath made me
lord of all Egypt: come down unto me, tarry not: {45:10} And thou shalt
dwell in the land of Goshen, and thou shalt be near unto me, thou, and
thy children, and thy children's children, and thy flocks, and thy
herds, and all that thou hast: {45:11} And there will I nourish thee;
for yet [there are] five years of famine; lest thou, and thy household,
and all that thou hast, come to poverty. {45:12} And, behold, your eyes
see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that [it is] my mouth that
speaketh unto you. {45:13} And ye shall tell my father of all my glory
in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring
down my father hither. {45:14} And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's
neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck. {45:15} Moreover he
kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them: and after that his
brethren talked with him.

   {45:16} And the fame thereof was heard in Pharaoh's house, saying,
Joseph's brethren are come: and it pleased Pharaoh well, and his
servants. {45:17} And Pharaoh said unto Joseph, Say unto thy brethren,
This do ye; lade your beasts, and go, get you unto the land of Canaan;
{45:18} And take your father and your households, and come unto me: and
I will give you the good of the land of Egypt, and ye shall eat the fat
of the land. {45:19} Now thou art commanded, this do ye; take you
wagons out of the land of Egypt for your little ones, and for your
wives, and bring your father, and come. {45:20} Also regard not your
stuff; for the good of all the land of Egypt [is] yours. {45:21} And
the children of Israel did so: and Joseph gave them wagons, according
to the commandment of Pharaoh, and gave them provision for the way.
{45:22} To all of them he gave each man changes of raiment; but to
Benjamin he gave three hundred [pieces] of silver, and five changes of
raiment. {45:23} And to his father he sent after this [manner;] ten
asses laden with the good things of Egypt, and ten she asses laden with
corn and bread and meat for his father by the way. {45:24} So he sent
his brethren away, and they departed: and he said unto them, See that
ye fall not out by the way.

   {45:25} And they went up out of Egypt, and came into the land of
Canaan unto Jacob their father, {45:26} And told him, saying, Joseph
[is] yet alive, and he [is] governor over all the land of Egypt. And
Jacob's heart fainted, for he believed them not. {45:27} And they told
him all the words of Joseph, which he had said unto them: and when he
saw the wagons which Joseph had sent to carry him, the spirit of Jacob
their father revived: {45:28} And Israel said, [It is] enough; Joseph
my son [is] yet alive: I will go and see him before I die.

   {46:1} And Israel took his journey with all that he had, and came to
Beer-sheba, and offered sacrifices unto the God of his father Isaac.
{46:2} And God spake unto Israel in the visions of the night, and said,
Jacob, Jacob. And he said, Here [am] I. {46:3} And he said, I [am] God,
the God of thy father: fear not to go down into Egypt; for I will there
make of thee a great nation: {46:4} I will go down with thee into
Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up [again:] and Joseph shall
put his hand upon thine eyes. {46:5} And Jacob rose up from Beer-sheba:
and the sons of Israel carried Jacob their father, and their little
ones, and their wives, in the wagons which Pharaoh had sent to carry
him. {46:6} And they took their cattle, and their goods, which they had
gotten in the land of Canaan, and came into Egypt, Jacob, and all his
seed with him: {46:7} His sons, and his sons' sons with him, his
daughters, and his sons' daughters, and all his seed brought he with
him into Egypt.

   {46:8} And these [are] the names of the children of Israel, which
came into Egypt, Jacob and his sons: Reuben, Jacob's firstborn. {46:9}
And the sons of Reuben; Hanoch, and Phallu, and Hezron, and Carmi.

   {46:10} And the sons of Simeon; Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and
Jachin, and Zohar, and Shaul the son of a Canaanitish woman.

   {46:11} And the sons of Levi; Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.

   {46:12} And the sons of Judah; Er, and Onan, and Shelah, and Pharez,
and Zarah: but Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan. And the sons of
Pharez were Hezron and Hamul.

   {46:13} And the sons of Issachar; Tola, and Phuvah, and Job, and
Shimron.

   {46:14} And the sons of Zebulun; Sered, and Elon, and Jahleel.
{46:15} These [be] the sons of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob in
Padan-aram, with his daughter Dinah: all the souls of his sons and his
daughters [were] thirty and three.

   {46:16} And the sons of Gad; Ziphion, and Haggi, Shuni, and Ezbon,
Eri, and Arodi, and Areli.

   {46:17} And the sons of Asher; Jimnah, and Ishuah, and Isui, and
Beriah, and Serah their sister: and the sons of Beriah; Heber, and
Malchiel. {46:18} These [are] the sons of Zilpah, whom Laban gave to
Leah his daughter, and these she bare unto Jacob, [even] sixteen souls.
{46:19} The sons of Rachel Jacob's wife; Joseph, and Benjamin.

   {46:20} And unto Joseph in the land of Egypt were born Manasseh and
Ephraim, which Asenath the daughter of Poti-pherah priest of On bare
unto him.

   {46:21} And the sons of Benjamin were Belah, and Becher, and Ashbel,
Gera, and Naaman, Ehi, and Rosh, Muppim, and Huppim, and Ard. {46:22}
These [are] the sons of Rachel, which were born to Jacob: all the souls
[were] fourteen.

   {46:23} And the sons of Dan; Hushim.

   {46:24} And the sons of Naphtali; Jahzeel, and Guni, and Jezer, and
Shillem. {46:25} These [are] the sons of Bilhah, which Laban gave unto
Rachel his daughter, and she bare these unto Jacob: all the souls
[were] seven. {46:26} All the souls that came with Jacob into Egypt,
which came out of his loins, besides Jacob's sons' wives, all the souls
[were] threescore and six; {46:27} And the sons of Joseph, which were
born him in Egypt, [were] two souls: all the souls of the house of
Jacob, which came into Egypt, [were] threescore and ten.

   {46:28} And he sent Judah before him unto Joseph, to direct his face
unto Goshen; and they came into the land of Goshen. {46:29} And Joseph
made ready his chariot, and went up to meet Israel his father, to
Goshen, and presented himself unto him; and he fell on his neck, and
wept on his neck a good while. {46:30} And Israel said unto Joseph, Now
let me die, since I have seen thy face, because thou [art] yet alive.
{46:31} And Joseph said unto his brethren, and unto his father's house,
I will go up, and shew Pharaoh, and say unto him, My brethren, and my
father's house, which [were] in the land of Canaan, are come unto me;
{46:32} And the men [are] shepherds, for their trade hath been to feed
cattle; and they have brought their flocks, and their herds, and all
that they have. {46:33} And it shall come to pass, when Pharaoh shall
call you, and shall say, What [is] your occupation? {46:34} That ye
shall say, Thy servants' trade hath been about cattle from our youth
even until now, both we, [and] also our fathers: that ye may dwell in
the land of Goshen; for every shepherd [is] an abomination unto the
Egyptians.

   {47:1} Then Joseph came and told Pharaoh, and said, My father and my
brethren, and their flocks, and their herds, and all that they have,
are come out of the land of Canaan; and, behold, they [are] in the land
of Goshen. {47:2} And he took some of his brethren, [even] five men,
and presented them unto Pharaoh. {47:3} And Pharaoh said unto his
brethren, What [is] your occupation? And they said unto Pharaoh, Thy
servants [are] shepherds, both we, [and] also our fathers. {47:4} They
said moreover unto Pharaoh, For to sojourn in the land are we come; for
thy servants have no pasture for their flocks; for the famine [is] sore
in the land of Canaan: now therefore, we pray thee, let thy servants
dwell in the land of Goshen. {47:5} And Pharaoh spake unto Joseph,
saying, Thy father and thy brethren are come unto thee: {47:6} The land
of Egypt [is] before thee; in the best of the land make thy father and
brethren to dwell; in the land of Goshen let them dwell: and if thou
knowest [any] men of activity among them, then make them rulers over my
cattle. {47:7} And Joseph brought in Jacob his father, and set him
before Pharaoh: and Jacob blessed Pharaoh. {47:8} And Pharaoh said unto
Jacob, How old [art] thou? {47:9} And Jacob said unto Pharaoh, The days
of the years of my pilgrimage [are] an hundred and thirty years: few
and evil have the days of the years of my life been, and have not
attained unto the days of the years of the life of my fathers in the
days of their pilgrimage. {47:10} And Jacob blessed Pharaoh, and went
out from before Pharaoh.

   {47:11} And Joseph placed his father and his brethren, and gave them
a possession in the land of Egypt, in the best of the land, in the land
of Rameses, as Pharaoh had commanded. {47:12} And Joseph nourished his
father, and his brethren, and all his father's household, with bread,
according to [their] families.

   {47:13} And [there was] no bread in all the land; for the famine
[was] very sore, so that the land of Egypt and [all] the land of Canaan
fainted by reason of the famine. {47:14} And Joseph gathered up all the
money that was found in the land of Egypt, and in the land of Canaan,
for the corn which they bought: and Joseph brought the money into
Pharaoh's house. {47:15} And when money failed in the land of Egypt,
and in the land of Canaan, all the Egyptians came unto Joseph, and
said, Give us bread: for why should we die in thy presence? for the
money faileth. {47:16} And Joseph said, Give your cattle; and I will
give you for your cattle, if money fail. {47:17} And they brought their
cattle unto Joseph: and Joseph gave them bread [in exchange] for
horses, and for the flocks, and for the cattle of the herds, and for
the asses: and he fed them with bread for all their cattle for that
year. {47:18} When that year was ended, they came unto him the second
year, and said unto him, We will not hide [it] from my lord, how that
our money is spent; my lord also hath our herds of cattle; there is not
ought left in the sight of my lord, but our bodies, and our lands:
{47:19} Wherefore shall we die before thine eyes, both we and our land?
buy us and our land for bread, and we and our land will be servants
unto Pharaoh: and give [us] seed, that we may live, and not die, that
the land be not desolate. {47:20} And Joseph bought all the land of
Egypt for Pharaoh; for the Egyptians sold every man his field, because
the famine prevailed over them: so the land became Pharaoh's. {47:21}
And as for the people, he removed them to cities from [one] end of the
borders of Egypt even to the [other] end thereof. {47:22} Only the land
of the priests bought he not; for the priests had a portion [assigned
them] of Pharaoh, and did eat their portion which Pharaoh gave them:
wherefore they sold not their lands. {47:23} Then Joseph said unto the
people, Behold, I have bought you this day and your land for Pharaoh:
lo, [here is] seed for you, and ye shall sow the land. {47:24} And it
shall come to pass in the increase, that ye shall give the fifth [part]
unto Pharaoh, and four parts shall be your own, for seed of the field,
and for your food, and for them of your households, and for food for
your little ones. {47:25} And they said, Thou hast saved our lives: let
us find grace in the sight of my lord, and we will be Pharaoh's
servants. {47:26} And Joseph made it a law over the land of Egypt unto
this day, [that] Pharaoh should have the fifth [part;] except the land
of the priests only, [which] became not Pharaoh's.

   {47:27} And Israel dwelt in the land of Egypt, in the country of
Goshen; and they had possessions therein, and grew, and multiplied
exceedingly. {47:28} And Jacob lived in the land of Egypt seventeen
years: so the whole age of Jacob was an hundred forty and seven years.
{47:29} And the time drew nigh that Israel must die: and he called his
son Joseph, and said unto him, If now I have found grace in thy sight,
put, I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and deal kindly and truly
with me; bury me not, I pray thee, in Egypt: {47:30} But I will lie
with my fathers, and thou shalt carry me out of Egypt, and bury me in
their buryingplace. And he said, I will do as thou hast said. {47:31}
And he said, Swear unto me. And he sware unto him. And Israel bowed
himself upon the bed's head.

   {48:1} And it came to pass after these things, that [one] told
Joseph, Behold, thy father [is] sick: and he took with him his two
sons, Manasseh and Ephraim. {48:2} And [one] told Jacob, and said,
Behold, thy son Joseph cometh unto thee: and Israel strengthened
himself, and sat upon the bed. {48:3} And Jacob said unto Joseph, God
Almighty appeared unto me at Luz in the land of Canaan, and blessed me,
{48:4} And said unto me, Behold, I will make thee fruitful, and
multiply thee, and I will make of thee a multitude of people; and will
give this land to thy seed after thee [for] an everlasting possession.

   {48:5} And now thy two sons, Ephraim and Manasseh, which were born
unto thee in the land of Egypt before I came unto thee into Egypt,
[are] mine; as Reuben and Simeon, they shall be mine. {48:6} And thy
issue, which thou begettest after them, shall be thine, [and] shall be
called after the name of their brethren in their inheritance. {48:7}
And as for me, when I came from Padan, Rachel died by me in the land of
Canaan in the way, when yet [there was] but a little way to come unto
Ephrath: and I buried her there in the way of Ephrath; the same is
Bethlehem. {48:8} And Israel beheld Joseph's sons, and said, Who [are]
these? {48:9} And Joseph said unto his father, They [are] my sons, whom
God hath given me in this [place.] And he said, Bring them, I pray
thee, unto me, and I will bless them. {48:10} Now the eyes of Israel
were dim for age, [so that] he could not see. And he brought them near
unto him; and he kissed them, and embraced them. {48:11} And Israel
said unto Joseph, I had not thought to see thy face: and, lo, God hath
shewed me also thy seed. {48:12} And Joseph brought them out from
between his knees, and he bowed himself with his face to the earth.
{48:13} And Joseph took them both, Ephraim in his right hand toward
Israel's left hand, and Manasseh in his left hand toward Israel's right
hand, and brought [them] near unto him. {48:14} And Israel stretched
out his right hand, and laid it upon Ephraim's head, who [was] the
younger, and his left hand upon Manasseh's head, guiding his hands
wittingly; for Manasseh [was] the firstborn.

   {48:15} And he blessed Joseph, and said, God, before whom my fathers
Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto
this day, {48:16} The Angel which redeemed me from all evil, bless the
lads; and let my name be named on them, and the name of my fathers
Abraham and Isaac; and let them grow into a multitude in the midst of
the earth. {48:17} And when Joseph saw that his father laid his right
hand upon the head of Ephraim, it displeased him: and he held up his
father's hand, to remove it from Ephraim's head unto Manasseh's head.
{48:18} And Joseph said unto his father, Not so, my father: for this
[is] the firstborn; put thy right hand upon his head. {48:19} And his
father refused, and said, I know [it,] my son, I know [it:] he also
shall become a people, and he also shall be great: but truly his
younger brother shall be greater than he, and his seed shall become a
multitude of nations. {48:20} And he blessed them that day, saying, In
thee shall Israel bless, saying, God make thee as Ephraim and as
Manasseh: and he set Ephraim before Manasseh. {48:21} And Israel said
unto Joseph, Behold, I die: but God shall be with you, and bring you
again unto the land of your fathers. {48:22} Moreover I have given to
thee one portion above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of
the Amorite with my sword and with my bow.

   {49:1} And Jacob called unto his sons, and said, Gather yourselves
together, that I may tell you [that] which shall befall you in the last
days. {49:2} Gather yourselves together, and hear, ye sons of Jacob;
and hearken unto Israel your father.

   {49:3} Reuben, thou [art] my firstborn, my might, and the beginning
of my strength, the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power:
{49:4} Unstable as water, thou shalt not excel; because thou wentest up
to thy father's bed; then defiledst thou [it:] he went up to my couch.

   {49:5} Simeon and Levi [are] brethren; instruments of cruelty [are
in] their habitations. {49:6} O my soul, come not thou into their
secret; unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united: for in
their anger they slew a man, and in their selfwill they digged down a
wall. {49:7} Cursed [be] their anger, for [it was] fierce; and their
wrath, for it was cruel: I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them
in Israel.

   {49:8} Judah, thou [art he] whom thy brethren shall praise: thy hand
[shall be] in the neck of thine enemies; thy father's children shall
bow down before thee. {49:9} Judah [is] a lion's whelp: from the prey,
my son, thou art gone up: he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as
an old lion; who shall rouse him up? {49:10} The sceptre shall not
depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh
come; and unto him [shall] the gathering of the people [be. ]{49:11}
Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the choice
vine; he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of
grapes: {49:12} His eyes [shall be] red with wine, and his teeth white
with milk.

   {49:13} Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea; and he [shall
be] for an haven of ships; and his border [shall be] unto Zidon.

   {49:14} Issachar [is] a strong ass couching down between two
burdens: {49:15} And he saw that rest [was] good, and the land that [it
was] pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant
unto tribute.

   {49:16} Dan shall judge his people, as one of the tribes of Israel.
{49:17} Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path, that
biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward. {49:18}
I have waited for thy salvation, O LORD.

   {49:19} Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at
the last.

   {49:20} Out of Asher his bread [shall be] fat, and he shall yield
royal dainties.

   {49:21} Naphtali [is] a hind let loose: he giveth goodly words.

   {49:22} Joseph [is] a fruitful bough, [even] a fruitful bough by a
well; [whose] branches run over the wall: {49:23} The archers have
sorely grieved him, and shot [at him,] and hated him: {49:24} But his
bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by
the hands of the mighty [God] of Jacob; (from thence [is] the shepherd,
the stone of Israel:) {49:25} [Even] by the God of thy father, who
shall help thee; and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with
blessings of heaven above, blessings of the deep that lieth under,
blessings of the breasts, and of the womb: {49:26} The blessings of thy
father have prevailed above the blessings of my progenitors unto the
utmost bound of the everlasting hills: they shall be on the head of
Joseph, and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his
brethren.

   {49:27} Benjamin shall ravin [as] a wolf: in the morning he shall
devour the prey, and at night he shall divide the spoil.

   {49:28} All these [are] the twelve tribes of Israel: and this [is
it] that their father spake unto them, and blessed them; every one
according to his blessing he blessed them. {49:29} And he charged them,
and said unto them, I am to be gathered unto my people: bury me with my
fathers in the cave that [is] in the field of Ephron the Hittite,
{49:30} In the cave that [is] in the field of Machpelah, which [is]
before Mamre, in the land of Canaan, which Abraham bought with the
field of Ephron the Hittite for a possession of a buryingplace. {49:31}
There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife; there they buried Isaac
and Rebekah his wife; and there I buried Leah. {49:32} The purchase of
the field and of the cave that [is] therein [was] from the children of
Heth. {49:33} And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons, he
gathered up his feet into the bed, and yielded up the ghost, and was
gathered unto his people.

   {50:1} And Joseph fell upon his father's face, and wept upon him,
and kissed him. {50:2} And Joseph commanded his servants the physicians
to embalm his father: and the physicians embalmed Israel. {50:3} And
forty days were fulfilled for him; for so are fulfilled the days of
those which are embalmed: and the Egyptians mourned for him threescore
and ten days. {50:4} And when the days of his mourning were past,
Joseph spake unto the house of Pharaoh, saying, If now I have found
grace in your eyes, speak, I pray you, in the ears of Pharaoh, saying,
{50:5} My father made me swear, saying, Lo, I die: in my grave which I
have digged for me in the land of Canaan, there shalt thou bury me. Now
therefore let me go up, I pray thee, and bury my father, and I will
come again. {50:6} And Pharaoh said, Go up, and bury thy father,
according as he made thee swear.

   {50:7} And Joseph went up to bury his father: and with him went up
all the servants of Pharaoh, the elders of his house, and all the
elders of the land of Egypt, {50:8} And all the house of Joseph, and
his brethren, and his father's house: only their little ones, and their
flocks, and their herds, they left in the land of Goshen. {50:9} And
there went up with him both chariots and horsemen: and it was a very
great company. {50:10} And they came to the threshingfloor of Atad,
which [is] beyond Jordan, and there they mourned with a great and very
sore lamentation: and he made a mourning for his father seven days.
{50:11} And when the inhabitants of the land, the Canaanites, saw the
mourning in the floor of Atad, they said, This [is] a grievous mourning
to the Egyptians: wherefore the name of it was called Abel-mizraim,
which [is] beyond Jordan. {50:12} And his sons did unto him according
as he commanded them: {50:13} For his sons carried him into the land of
Canaan, and buried him in the cave of the field of Machpelah, which
Abraham bought with the field for a possession of a buryingplace of
Ephron the Hittite, before Mamre.

   {50:14} And Joseph returned into Egypt, he, and his brethren, and
all that went up with him to bury his father, after he had buried his
father.

   {50:15} And when Joseph's brethren saw that their father was dead,
they said, Joseph will peradventure hate us, and will certainly requite
us all the evil which we did unto him. {50:16} And they sent a
messenger unto Joseph, saying, Thy father did command before he died,
saying, {50:17} So shall ye say unto Joseph, Forgive, I pray thee now,
the trespass of thy brethren, and their sin; for they did unto thee
evil: and now, we pray thee, forgive the trespass of the servants of
the God of thy father. And Joseph wept when they spake unto him.
{50:18} And his brethren also went and fell down before his face; and
they said, Behold, we [be] thy servants. {50:19} And Joseph said unto
them, Fear not: for [am] I in the place of God? {50:20} But as for you,
ye thought evil against me; [but] God meant it unto good, to bring to
pass, as [it is] this day, to save much people alive. {50:21} Now
therefore fear ye not: I will nourish you, and your little ones. And he
comforted them, and spake kindly unto them.

   {50:22} And Joseph dwelt in Egypt, he, and his father's house: and
Joseph lived an hundred and ten years. {50:23} And Joseph saw Ephraim's
children of the third [generation:] the children also of Machir the son
Manasseh were brought up upon Joseph's knees. {50:24} And Joseph said
unto his brethren, I die: and God will surely visit you, and bring you
out of this land unto the land which he sware to Abraham, to Isaac, and
to Jacob. {50:25} And Joseph took an oath of the children of Israel,
saying, God will surely visit you, and ye shall carry up my bones from
hence. {50:26} So Joseph died, [being] an hundred and ten years old:
and they embalmed him, and he was put in a coffin in Egypt.




